I painted a scenario that was going to
result in the extinction of humanity and
approximately how long it would take the
problem is it's already underway on a
time scale of decades and we have
created a fragile world that cannot
endure this shift people should they be
preparing
absolutely that's quite scary Dr Brett
Weinstein is an evolutionary biologist
and former Professor uncovering the
world's most pressing and controversial
issues and offering his solutions to
save Humanity from a destructive future
humanity is in terrible danger and the
number of existential threats is growing
for example I'm profoundly concerned we
are going to squander the lesson of Co
you can see the complete collapse of
Journalism our political institutions
our courts they all failed the tragedy
is most people don't know that we are
still not being honest about the origin
of Co and the truth
is but our political institutions don't
want to talk about it which is going to
mean that the failures we going to come
back is there anything else on your list
of concerns so I have five different
existential threats that AI poses and we
will go through them but we have no
evolutionary preparedness for living in
a world where a computer can out compete
a human being that's a dangerous world
to live in is there anything we can do
to prepare or to avert this crisis yes
here's what I
suggest Brent of all these existential
threats is there one that's at the very
top of your list yes there's nothing
more dangerous of this and that
is this is a sentence I never thought
I'd say in my life um we've just hit 7
million subscribers on YouTube and I
want to say a huge thank you to all of
you that show up here every Monday and
Thursday to watch our conversations um
from the bottom of my heart but also on
behalf of my team who you don't always
get to meet there's almost 50 people now
behind the dire of a CEO that work to
put this together so from all of us
thank you so much um we did a raffle
last month and we gave away Prime for
people that subscrib to the show up
until 7 million subscribers and you guys
love that raffle so much that we're
going to continue it so every single
month we're giving away money can't buy
prizes including meetings with me
invites to our events and ,000 gift
vouchers to anyone that subscribes to
the dire Co there's now more than 7
million of you so if you make the
decision to subscribe today you can be
one of those lucky people thank you from
the bottom of my heart let's get to the
[Music]
conversation
R Who who are you and what mission are
you on and when I ask that second
question I'm looking at the full body of
your work and I'm trying to encapsulate
it maybe in just a couple of
sentences
sure I am an evolutionary biologist I'm
a former college professor who has been
cast into the role of a public
intellectual by bizarre events at my
college I am on a mission and I'm afraid
it's going to
sound weird to people I think humanity
is in terrible danger I think we worry
about the wrong things and I do not have
any reason to believe that anything I
could do is going to change the fate of
humanity but I feel obligated to
try that is to say if we're going to be
doomed by our errors and I know
something about what those errors are
then it falls to me to try to make that
clear to people and processes that might
have the power to redirect us so I'm
making that effort even though frankly I
think it's unlikely to work that's quite
scary Brett yep I've gotten over that
part what exactly are you referring to
when you say that you think Humanity
might be doomed there's a basic set of
premises that just comes out of biology
no species is forever and that includes
our species no matter what I or anyone
else does but the objective of the
exercise is really to Stave off
Extinction as long as possible and I
believe that that is a valid thing to do
it is a vital thing to do even if in the
end we know that no matter how
successful we were we're not going to
escape the destruction of the solar
system we're not going to escape the
Collision of our galaxy into another and
even if we did ultimately the universe
has a fate and it will take us out with
it if we beat every odd
but why are we in trouble well we're in
trouble because all creatures
are wellb built for the environments in
which we
evolved and human beings suffer from
something that uh my wife Heather and I
in our book call
hyper
novelty so novelty is the state of
something being not what you are
evolutionarily prepared for and human
beings are very good at dealing with
novelty but what we're doing in the
present is we're creating a rate of
change that is so rapid that there is no
conceivable way for us to keep up we
cannot adapt fast enough to keep up with
the novel influences that we are um
forcing Upon Our ourselves and what that
means is that with each passing year we
end up ever more poorly adapted to the
life that we have to lead and it's
gotten so bad
that the environments that we live in as
adults don't even resemble the
environments that existed for adults
when we were
kids the reason that human beings have a
longer developmental period than any
other creature that has ever existed on
this planet
is that you need a long developmental
period for us to acquire the insight and
the Nuance in order to be a functional
adult that program doesn't work if the
environment in which you are picking up
those lessons is unrelated to the
environment in which you have to do the
adult stuff it's a non seiter so that's
why we're in trouble we have
technologies that are powerful enough to
destroy us we have processes that we
have unleashed the consequences of which
we can scarcely imagine and as these
things proliferate the number of
existential threats to humanity is just
simply growing we have to re in that
problem the proliferation of existential
threats means that the moment that which
we blink out as a species is getting
closer if it isn't this that takes us
out it'll be that we have to arrest that
process of all these pressing concerns
and of all these existential threats is
there one that's at the very top of your
list of concerns well they're not
even uh completely separable so for
example there we are politically
obsessed in this country and across the
the Western World with anthropogenic
climate change I'm sure you've noticed
what is anthropogenic climate change
anthropogenic climate change is a change
in the average conditions on planet
Earth that is driven by human
activity so the claim is that CO2 traps
heat from the Sun causing the mean
temperature to rise that will have
impacts on for example how much ice
persists at high altitudes and in the
Arctic and the uh other cold
regions and that that then is part of a
positive feedback where because ice is
white it reflects the sun's energy back
into space so the more ice that melts
the darker the world becomes the more
light it absorbs the warmer it becomes
so that positive feedback is actually a
real reason for concern
however the increasingly model driven
Mania about global warming is at odds
with what we understand about models
models are not a valid test of a
hypothesis in a complex system they
can't be so we are treating these models
as if they tell what's going to happen
and that is not a philosophically valid
thing to do but it is also just
simply not in keeping
with an understanding of the underlying
requirements for functional
science if you were in climatology today
and you attempted to publish a paper
that said actually uh anthropogenic
climate change is only a quarter as bad
as we
fear you would have great difficulty
publishing that and you would experience
a spectacular uh decrease in your
viability as an academic so what we can
infer from that is that we probably have
a lot of papers that point in a
direction that the field is interested
in promoting and that we have a dir of
papers that might point in the other
direction so in effect when we look at
the sum total of papers and we say oh my
God they all say the same thing we're in
big trouble well do they all say the
same thing cuz we're in big trouble and
that's what an honest analysis would
give you or is that just an echo of what
we put into the system so I'm much less
worried about anthrop penic climate
change and I'm much more worried about
some other threats that to my way of
thinking clearly dwarf it in
magnitude
so we have several problems related to
space weather the Sun goes through a
cycle an 11-year Sunspot
Cycle those sunspots often release solar
flares those solar flares are in general
directed randomly off the Sun and
because the Earth is only in one spot
most of the solar flares that the sun
flings off don't hit us what's a solar
flare a solar flare is well it's really
the coronal mass ejection that is the
important part the flare is the thing
you see on the Sun that looks like a big
flame sort of flipping off the sun when
it does that that actually in many cases
ejects a
concentrated glob of plasma right these
are charged
particles and they get flung off they
get flung off at speeds that are not
consistent they're not moving at the
speed of light they're moving at the
speed of stuff right and that speed of
stuff is variable but a couple days
after a solar flare that releases a
coronal mass ejection in the direction
of the earth we get a wave of these
charged particles across the Earth yeah
yeah and that causes things that we are
all familiar with whether you've seen it
or not this uh increases the the Aurora
Borealis for example the Northern Lights
so it's a very spectacular show and you
probably are aware maybe you saw it
yourself but we recently had a uh an
aurora that reached as far south as
Puerto Rico right that's a really
unusual thing to happen and even more
unusual is the fact so they usually
reach sort of the top part of the earth
is that is that right yeah you you if
you're up near the Arctic Circle yeah
you uh you see these things regularly
the farther south you are the less
likely you are to see them yeah I saw it
in North Sweden and sort of Iceland as
well perfect place right um but for the
for people to see it in Puerto Rico is
highly unusual and you would think that
that indicates that the burst of plasma
that hit the earth was in some way
highly unusual and it wasn't something
else is going on that Aurora reached
farther south than it should have based
on the magnitude of the coronal mass
mass ejection which was substantial but
hardly
unprecedent now what most people don't
know is that there was a major solar
storm that hit the earth in
1859 it goes by the name of the
Carrington event named for the
astronomer who realized that the weird
effects that happened on Earth were
correlated to something he had seen on
the sun he had effectively put those two
he had seen the uh the flare and then
deduced that this was related to it now
in
1859 the world was not a very electrical
place in fact the primary use of
electricity was telegraphs and at the
time this burst of plasma caused those
telegraphs stations caught fire the
entire network went down Telegraph
operators were shocked at their
stations messages could be sent even
though there was no power being
delivered to the system it went down and
the induced charge in the wires was
enough for telegraph operators to send
messages over distances so it was very
dramatic if you were involved in
telegraphs but for the rest of humanity
it was a minor event now we live in a
very different world we live in a world
where every everything has an electrical
component the way our cars function the
way food shows up in the supermarket the
way air travel and air traffic control
works all of these things are heavily
electrical and they are all tremendously
vulnerable to the EMP effects that will
come with a major solar impact what's
the EMP effect it's an electromagnetic
pulse which is basically an induced
charge in uh uh electrically active
materials so it's the kind of thing that
uh a big enough one will fry every
computer will uh take most of the cars
off the road and what we don't commonly
know is that our grids the grids that
operate all of our electrical
devices
are um they operate with these
Transformers right which uh
control the flow of current these
Transformers are huge complicated
machines and if you needed one and you
ordered it today it would take a year
for you to get it if the world suddenly
needed 70 of them or a 100 of them
there's no telling what would happen so
well we all have the experience of a
power outage causing us to lose
electricity
for uh you know hours or days it is
quite conceivable that a solar storm
that took out a significant number of
Transformers could take a continent and
turn it dark with no plan for bringing
the lights back on they would go out and
they wouldn't come back and this was a
ridiculous uh risk to run the
Transformers can be hardened against
this they cannot be perfectly immunized
from this effect but they can be
hardened with well understood
architecture architecture that
effectively grounds out the EMP so that
the Transformer comes back on after the
event but we don't do it so we are
running an incredibly large risk of
a section of a continent or an entire
continent going dark with no backup
plan to me the risk of that dwarfs
anything that might be true about
antropogenic climate
change what's more you've probably heard
that
um pole shifts
happen that the North Pole isn't always
where the North Pole currently is and
that sometimes these things flip that's
always struck me as an extremely
dangerous condition and I always assumed
well what are the chances you're going
to be alive you know if you were alive
within 500 years of a PO flip that would
be kind of a close call but what are the
chances going to happen during your
lifetime well we are actually living in
a moment where the pole is actively
migrating we are in the midst of what's
called a polar
Excursion the pole seems to be
flipping and it seems to be flipping at
the same time that our electromagnetic
field of the earth is
decreasing now that decreasing field
means that what's flung off the sun has
a bigger impact on Earth that it would
than it would ordinarily have and that
pole flip threatens uh chaos you could
imagine if we feared
Y2K right that a programming error a
failure to account for the fact that you
were going to have this turnover in the
dates uh worried people that an actual
pull flip would create chaos and the
fact that we are not at least as worried
if not 10 times as worried about the
fact that we are living through a polar
Excursion and a radical decrease in the
strength of our electromagnetic field on
Earth says that we just have our
priorities wrong what is causing the
pole to flip and what does that does
that mean because when I think about a
pole flip does that mean the the North
Pole just moves a little bit the South
Pole moves a little bit it's not a
little
bit these things are going to
move
radically and the rate at which they are
moving is accelerating this is is
happening on a time scale that's highly
relevant to you and me we are both
likely to be here to see um the full
shift whatever that full shift entails
and they're not always the same so it's
a little hard to predict now I will say
this is not my area of expertise I have
learned tremendously from others um Ben
Davidson being the primary person
somebody I had on on the Dark Horse
podcast and he has a very compelling
model a hypothesis that I believe does
explain many otherwise difficult to
explain features of our solar
environment his explanation is that the
solar system is moving constantly within
the Galaxy and that the Galaxy by its
very nature contains an oscillating
electromagnetic sheet and as the solar
system moves through that sheet sheet we
cross the plane in the middle which
causes all the electrically active
entities to experience an inversion the
sun experiences an inversion the other
planets experience an inversion the
Earth experiences an inversion when you
say inversion you mean the the sort of
electromagnetic sense yeah it's you know
it's the direction of pull if you when
we talk about electric electromagnetism
we're talking about attraction and rep
repulsion and if you imagine that you
flipped the sign on everything because
you just crossed the middle of something
like you know if you were holding a
magnet here right and the north side is
down and the south side is up and you
moved another magnet by it the direction
of pull would shift as you crossed that
Equator so we are crossing something
like an equator of the Galaxy and that
cross is causing anomalous behavior on
Earth but it's also causing it we know
on eight of the nine other planets and
the ninth planet we just simply don't
have the data yet it's not that we know
it it's somehow immune to it and we're
seeing anomalous behavior on the Sun
so what I understand is that there's a
story about the Galaxy that we barely
know that story interfaces with many
things that we do know from the fossil
record from geology which are hard to
explain why does the pole flip and that
at the very least we need a concentrated
effort where we look into these
questions and if Ben Davidson has it
wrong if there is no Galactic current
sheet if we are not Crossing its
Meridian if the electromagnetic field is
decreasing but is about to turn around
rather than continue to decline then we
should find that out um but I think what
we would find out if we looked deeply
into this if we took it seriously is
that there is a threat to to humanity
that has very little to do with anything
anthropogenic the only important
component that is an anthropogenic is
that we have created a fragile world
that cannot endure this shift what does
anthropogenic mean go word human-made
human made okay human made so you know
anthropogenic climate change means that
we put a lot of carbon into the
atmosphere that wasn't there before
which we certainly have you know the uh
our fuels are made of car carbon and
when we break these more complex carbon
molecules carbon dioxide is released
that's not really a bad thing inherently
because carbon dioxide isn't a poison
right so taking these rings of carbon
and breaking it into carbon dioxide and
water is uh not the worst way to get
energy if you can do it
cleanly but the problem is there's a
there's a an old equation called the
arenus equation which tells us that c
CO2 will actually cause the retention of
heat from the Sun and as I mentioned at
the beginning the fact of trapping a
little extra heat might not be that
important were it not for the fact that
there's a positive feedback that
involves the whiteness of the poles the
amount of energy bounced back into space
which keeps us cool and as the poles
melt the Earth becomes darker it traps
more heat so that's an anthropogenic
effect because we've released all of
this carbon that was trapped in fossil
fuel deposits so on this point of the
pole shifting I just want to make sure
I'm super clear are you do you actually
mean that the North and South Pole would
move well this
is in my
opinion up in the air very serious
people have inferred from various kinds
of evidence that the Earth itself might
actually rotate or appear to rotate that
the uh crust that is the surface that we
live on could unlock from the mantle
currently they are locked together but
it could unlock and rotate over the
surface of the mantle now I am not
convinced that that can happen I'm not
convinced it's
impossible people uh people as smart as
Einstein have considered this
possibility and that in fact it would be
driven to happen by the accumulated Mass
on the pole in the form of ice that that
would actually drag get towards the
equator if they became unlocked so we
have really two different disaster
scenarios that could invol and unfold
one involves simply the magnetic
orientation of the earth shifting and
leaving the crust where it is and the
other involving the crust actually
rotating um the reason that I am
doubtful about the crust rotating and I
wouldn't I wouldn't bet strongly in
either direction but the reason that I
am doubtful is that as a biologist I
find the idea that the pole would move
to the equator hard to reconcile with
the distribution of species that we see
on the
earth so there's something that doesn't
quite fit about that story for me it
would require something in the biology
that I believe is not described um it's
possible I can imagine things that would
do it but I don't see it so I'm hesitant
about the idea of the crust unlocking
but I don't regard it as uh nothing to
worry about just so I'm clear when you
point
to um evolutionary history having and
sort of the distribution of species on
the earth giving a clue you essentially
saying that if this had happened in the
past we wouldn't see through the fossil
records that certain species exist
around the
equator yeah and you know let's take the
example of the the Amazon so there's a
very famous biological experiment by
kind of an old school biologist who I
did have the Good Fortune of meeting uh
many years ago guy named Paul colino who
was testing the question there was a
debate in biology about whether or not
the Amazon became a grassland during
glaciation and became a forest during
interglacial periods and he went on one
of the sort of old school excursions
into the Amazon to take pollen cores
from from Lakes um which is interesting
it's not a lake filled environment but
anyway he he found locations took these
pollen cores which should tell the tale
because they we can tell which pollen
you're looking at and it gets laid down
in layers and so if it was flipping back
and forth between a grassland and a
forest you could see it that was not
what they came up with what they came up
with is this is this has been a forest
and it has remained a forest without
being a
grassland now the problem is if you move
it 90° off that should drive all of the
creatures there extinct and you should
have to go through some process that
causes either massive migration from
somewhere else or uh re-evolution and
the problem is this model in which we
are passing through this electromagnetic
sheet every 12,000 years just doesn't
leave time for these processes so you
would expect the Amazon would have many
fewer species in it than it does and I
will tell you as somebody who has worked
in the neotropics including the Amazon
one of the paradoxes about the creatures
that are in this
environment is that they are absolutely
ferocious
competitors that are very fragile they
require very narrow sets of conditions
in order to live so the idea that
there's some radical upheaval in their
climate that leaves them standing uh
it's hard hard for me to
square but anyway what I would love is
for a robust
scientific institution of some kind to
delve deeply into the set of questions
involving this apparent 12,000-year
disaster cycle the uh electromagnetic
sheet in the Galaxy our location in that
pattern and figure out what we do need
to worry about and what we don't and if
it's not that second
um possibility that the crust itself is
just sort of is Shifting and the mantle
is staying in the same position the
first possibility is that there's just a
movement of um sort of
electromagnetic poles yeah the North and
South po stay in the same place but the
axis of rotation could stay in the same
place right okay um and then the Poes
migrate to somewhere new and my
understanding uh is that that migration
is not the simple thing that uh that I
and probably you learned when you heard
that there was a pole shift where you
hear it's like you know it just flips
over um they are migrating around and
actually the path of migration is
something that is being tracked not
widely discussed for some reason but it
is being tracked and it's accelerating
as I mentioned what's what's the risk of
that and how long do does something like
that take if we look if we think back to
the our history well I'm coming to
understand understand this and what
I'm uh what I'm recognizing is that the
rate is far faster than I had understood
and that it's already underway so that's
an interesting fact we're talking about
on the scale of
decades
um we are in the middle of a uh solar
maximum in the Sunspot Cycle so that
Aurora that you saw uh I guess month and
a half or or so ago that was part of
this very active period of sunspots in
which we took a very substantial Chon
chronal mass ejection that pattern of
sunspots will Wan and we will go into a
period of calm during which presumably
the magnetic field will continue to
decrease and then the sunspots will
return 11 years down the road 11 years
yeah oh okay and so I am concerned that
probably we get away with it the level
of decrease in the magnetic field is
substantial but that we still have
enough protection from it that we will
get through this sunspot cycle and be
unscathed and then we'll have a period
of calm while the electromagnetic field
continues to decrease and then the next
Sunspot Cycle will be much more
perilous now you know this can change
tomorrow right these sunspots
um come around the Sun and then they
disappear onto the other side you know
and it takes a month to do a full cycle
new sunspots are being born a monster
could arrive tomorrow it could rotate
and point to the Earth and it could
fling off a coronal mass ejection at the
wrong moment or not um you know there's
a lot of luck of the draw in there but
uh we should be paying a lot more
attention than we are and what could we
do to prepare
or to sort of avoid the
catastrophe it depends on how
catastrophic it is and um what I would
say
is I'm somebody who for whatever reason
I sometimes struggle with mundane
day-to-day organizational tasks but I'm
very good in an
emergency and the emergency answer is
pretty clear here which is you get your
house in order right you look at the
fragility of our world and you start
with the low hanging fruit you take care
of the stuff that's low cost and
high uh impact in terms of increasing
our robustness and you do that first so
top two things on my list would be you
harden the
grids by retrofitting these Transformers
so that they ground out rather than fry
that's one and the second one is you
look at our nuclear reactors and you
realize that we've been setting
ourselves up we we built a doom stay
device I think
accidentally um and the problem the
problem is a compound problem what I
didn't know about nuclear reactors until
the Fukushima accident at which point I
did a lot of
research is that they are absolutely
depend dependent on an electrical supply
to keep them from melting
down you have to have an energy input
now if you have something like an
earthquake a tsunami A
disruption the reactors will shut
themselves down if they have
time but that doesn't get you out of the
woods because you have to put energy in
in order to keep the cooling water
flowing and that cooling water is not
just about keeping the reactors cool
it's also about keeping the fuel pools
cool so the fuel pools are where fuel is
taken after it's removed from the
reactor now for something like 5 years a
set of rods taken out of a reactor is
releasing what's called Decay heat that
decay heat is sufficient to boil the
water out of these fuel pools if you're
not constantly circulating new cold
water in there so these fuel pools look
like they're
unimportant but if you cut the
power you've started the stopwatch right
that water is going to boil off and when
that water boils off they're going to
catch fire the cladding on the rods Will
C literally catch fire from the heat now
the reactors for reasons that
are almost too boring to
recount contain not only the fuel rods
from the most recent 5 years of
refueling
but they also contain Decades of rods
that we never found any other solution
for stuff what are these rods these are
sort of nuclear rods yeah these are
nuclear basically they are um physical
rods clad in something called
zirconium that contain fuel pellets this
is uranium that has been packed in a
particular way these rods get loaded
into the
reactor and then there's a another set
of rods that are used to modulate how
much the rods interact with each other
pull the modulator out and you get a a
chain reaction um you put the rods the
uh control rods back in and it tamps
down the reaction so in an earthquake
you Tamp down the reaction right and
then you're not putting out uh Power but
you do need to put Power in to keep it
cool if the power goes and the water
boils off the thing will explode explode
as we saw in
Fukushima you had a situation in which
the cooling water literally got torn
apart into hydrogen and oxygen so it
goes from a coolant to an explosive and
we had multiple explosions where the
hydrogen oxygen mixture just blew the
buildings apart um but the rods that
have been stored for decades in these
pools and the pools literally sit there
right next to the reactor so if you lose
control of of these reactors it
threatens to take out the pool right and
the pool can go dry if you can't
circulate water through it the pool can
crack and all the water can drain out
and then there's not even a way that you
could put water in and stop it and my
point is that when that happens it's
going to create a fire that fire is
going to start spewing highly
radioactive material into the atmosphere
right around the plant that's going to
make it impossible for human beings to
do even the heroic stuff that we've seen
in both Fukushima and Chernobyl and
you're going to lose control of the site
now combine what I just told you with
the fact that we have a grid that is
vulnerable to going down and not coming
back up for months and the question is
well do we start losing nuclear reactors
things that if we could keep power
flowing to them could remain cool and
not blow up but as soon as we lose
control of them boom there are 400
nuclear reactors on Earth today civilian
nuclear
reactors the world will look like a very
different place if they all lose not
only the containment of the reactor
itself but all of the builtup material
that exists in those fuel pools right
some of the Isotopes in those fuel pools
have have lives of 200,000 years jez so
you don't want to live in a world in
which these things have gotten away from
us and all of that radioactive material
has been liberated into into the
atmosphere by fires so second thing on
my list right after hardening the grid
by improving these
Transformers is that you take all of the
fuel in the spent fuel pools that is
cool enough to remove and you put it
into what's called dry Cask storage dry
Cask storage are these sort of fancy
containers that don't require you to
circulate water through them they just
sit there inert all right you could
leave them for a thousand years
so the risk to humanity would be hugely
decreased if we took all of the fuel
that doesn't have to be in the pools and
we got it out of there and we put it in
a place that we don't have to pay
attention to it in order for it to
remain contained why don't people do
that it costs money it's too expensive
no it's not too expensive I mean I I
don't both of these measures are so
cheap compared to the risk that we're
running that I think you would have to
be positively mad not to spend the money
it's just more expensive yeah it's more
expensive you know okay so the the
incentives to do that on on on clear
well not only are the incentives not
clear but this is this is why you need
good governance right for those who
think that markets just simply solve
every problem if competitors are making
the decision whether or not to take
their spent Fuel and put it in dry casks
well the competitor that decides not to
out compete the competitor that decides
to do it because their bottom line is
better but what you need is good
governance to say actually you all have
to put everything that can go into dryas
storage as soon as it can go for
Humanity's safety is there anything we
can do on an individual level to prepare
or to avert this crisis yes here's what
I suggest let's talk about it on
podcasts and hope that somebody with
power realizes how dangerous this stuff
is and starts the correct initiative
within some governmental structure that
remembers how to do its job is there
anything else that on you know people
people often think about prepping and
preparing for these kinds of things B
digging a bunker under their house and
hiding in there or having
supplies well
so look I
think preparing at all scales is a good
idea we've face many different
uh
scenarios some of them aren't survivable
okay well if you've prepared and you hit
an unsurvivable scenario I guess you
could make an argument that you didn't
make as much of the time you had but I
don't find that very compelling seems to
me that
the the lwh hanging fruit phenomenon
is it's the consequence of
something that is essentially Universal
which is a pattern of diminishing
returns right diminishing returns means
that over time if you keep putting the
same uh solution to a problem you get
less and less benefit but it has a
positive side too a diminishing returns
curve has this very steep face on it
right that face is the bargain face
that's the face where you get a ton of
benefit for a small amount of investment
you should certainly do all the stuff up
until you get to that point where it
goes from a steep face to a
plateau so let's just do that right who
knows maybe the calculations about um
the galactic current sheet are off
because there aren't enough people
studying it we just don't get it yet
okay maybe there's 500 more years than
we think right maybe there's some Factor
we haven't found yet that has some
impact on the system we don't know so
you should always be doing the stuff
that makes you uh more capable of
surviving the disaster even if you think
it's not enough and then hopefully you
discover things are better than you
think um so we should be doing that at
every scale and yes people should they
be preparing absolutely should they
spend everything on it no do you prepare
in any way oh yeah what does that look
like for you well you know I have little
rules for myself one I
realized okay if we were to take a if we
were to map out all of the things that
I'm worried are a threat and then you
say well which are the ones that you're
going to have an extremely difficult
time affecting your likelihood of
surviving
it okay I'm going to ignore those yeah
right the why would I spend everything
on a solution that's almost certain to
fail anyway right I mean none of us are
getting out of here alive so at some
level you can just say look there there
are things that aren't worth preparing
for either because they're too unlikely
or because they're too catastrophic and
you're not getting out of it and maybe
you wouldn't want to live in such a
world anyway Bingo that's the next thing
is you know I'm not sure how thrilled I
am about a world in which 400 civilian
nuclear reactors have spilled the entire
history of their uh their functioning
into the environment um
I I'm much more animated about getting
us to reduce that Hazard on the front
end than surviving it if it
occurs um so I think I think people
should look at their life and they
should probably go through a little
period of alarm if
you if you look at the way your life
works and then we flip the electricity
off right suppose your continent loses
electricity for a
year how well prepared aren't you for
that me totally unprepared totally
unprepared my Tesla outside has like 50
miles left on it so I would I wouldn't
even be able to get yep get far from
here right so that's not a good plan but
there are things you can do right you
can let's put it this
way the power going out for a year
that's a pretty far down the list
scenario that's pretty catastrophic in
fact I wrote a uh an article for
unheard in which I painted a scenario in
which the sun did trigger the collapse
of just a part of the North American
grid and
I uh described how that was going to
result in the extinction of humanity and
approximately how long it would take it
was surprising how easy it was to write
it actually um
but could the power go out for two
weeks yeah how you know how hard is it
for you to prepare yourself and your
family so that in a two week grid down
scenario you'd be able to get
through well depends if it's summer or
winter right um if it's summer it looks
like one thing you really need food and
water if it's winter depending upon
where you live you might need to figure
out how you're going to generate heat um
enough to keep you I would say you want
to go beyond alive you want to get to
where your com your family feels
comfortable um but you know could you
edit down to one room could you keep
that room warm how would you do it you
know you don't want to have to you don't
want to have to run through that in the
circumstance because a twoe scenario I
mean that just simply happens MH um so
anyway yeah I think prepping is a great
idea for many reasons for one thing it's
mentally clarifying right just even
understanding how dependent we all are
on the systems around us makes us better
citizens so let's say we managed to
avoid the solar flare yep what else is
sort of friend to mind for you in terms
of concerns at the moment I'm very
worried about the absolute collapse of
our
institutions I cannot think of a single
sizable institution that still functions
in any meaningful way many of our
institutions actually function function
to the inverse of the purpose for which
they were created when you say collapse
of Institutions which institutions are
you referring to I believe I mean all of
them and I will just give you some
examples in the world I grew up in there
was something called a newspaper yeah
the newspaper was far from perfect it
reported a lot of garbage there was a
lot of propaganda in it and there was a
lot of wrongheaded stuff that got
reported as if it was true so I'm not
pretending that it was uh
a source of facts that one could just
simply go to to look them up
however I now live in a world in
which the newspapers look like the
newspapers I grew up with but
they seem to bend over backwards not to
report the
news and then they finally do report the
news only be when it becomes so
embarrassing for it not to show up there
that it would reveal how broken they are
if it didn't get
said and that's not normal
we should be trying to make sense of the
world you can tell this isn't normal
because if there was a newspaper that
just simply did what the newspapers of
old did that had a newsroom it had a
budget it sent people to places where
important things were happening it
assigned them the job of talking to
people and seeking the facts and
soliciting documents and taking pictures
and all of that stuff and it did its
best to give you a view of the world as
that flawed Newsroom the best it could
best sense it could make would you
subscribe yes you and everybody else
well I think I would I have to check
myself there because what I think I
would do is probably different to what
my innate biases might lead me to do and
to click
on
well uh I will tell you that in a world
where we are all quite unsure about
what's actually taking place even just
the basic facts that if there was such
an object I think it's a slam dunk you'd
sign up even if you don't spot it
because the disadvantage when other
people have access to the facts just not
knowing what it is that they're even
talking about would be uh it would be
like everybody in the room knows a
secret and you don't but do we want the
news or do we want confirmation of what
our existing beliefs well I think people
differ and I think it is very easy to
get addicted to confirmation bias but I
also think that that's Downstream of the
failure of another institution our
academic institutions our schools do not
teach people how thinking works and if
you know how thinking
works then you understand that
actually confirmation bias will get you
killed you don't want to be told
something comforting you want to be told
something true because the Comfort
actually comes
from utilizing that information to make
yourself less vulnerable
so having a newspaper would be a
fantastic thing the fact that there are
none let's say that you know 30% of
thinking people would subscribe to a
newspaper that just simply tried to do
the job and was undaunted
by competing incentives well then that's
a slam dunk of a business model wouldn't
you say do you know it's interesting
because I I sometimes think that the
reason why things I idolize or I I would
like don't exist it's because there's
actually not a market there for it and
like simple sort of supply and demand
economics mean that someone's probably
tried it and their startup probably went
bust well it did but I don't think
that's organic I think it is a slam dunk
and that the problem is that there is a
competing Force okay and one thing that
is true of the way our world is
structured is that the go-to mechanism
for making a
fortune
is inside
information now Innovation also works
but it's difficult
knowing a sector of the market so well
that you can beat your competitors CU
you understand what the future is going
to look like is also possible but Again
difficult and the incentive the
financial incentive to know everything
you know and out compete you in the
market is so great that you will have a
great many competitors struggling to
make better sense with the very same
data set that you've
got inside information doesn't work like
that if you you can get inside
information you can print money so for
anyone that doesn't know what inside
information means in like the context of
business or investing well in the
context so this is one of these things
that has a definition has a formal legal
definition from the initial context in
which it was identified as a as an issue
but if you are um inside of a
company and you're therefore privy to
something that is about to be done
then you can utilize that information
which is not available to the public to
make money
by increasing your Holdings decreasing
them buying stock options and that's
illegal right because obviously this
people would use this to make money um
by creating events and betting on them
in advance when nobody else knew the
problem is that same logic applies in
places where the law can't reach it so
let me take one example
there in the community of people who
ended up uh sleuthing about the events
of covid there's the moment at which
covid became a feature of the public
discussion at the beginning of
2020 and then there's the moment that it
appears to have existed in circulation
in the world which is much earlier the
Wuhan games in October or September of
if you were privy to the fact that there
was a pathogen that was going to
circulate that it was going to result in
a major upheaval in people's ability to
travel across borders that people were
going to be fearful and locked in their
homes that they were going to be seeking
pharmaceutical remedies whatever if you
had some sense of what was
coming then you could position yourself
in the market so that when it did come
you'd make a
mint so the question is when powerful
people did hear in September of 2019
that there was a pathogen that was on
the loose in China that would spread
worldwide was their first instinct to
tell the
public no there's a perverse incentive
against it so now imagine
that you're ruthless and you recognize
that that scenario that I just painted
isn't at all unique any place where you
can get the jump on the public with
respect to knowing what's coming is an
opportunity to make millions into
billions
so maybe you don't want the public to
have truth seeking institutions that
work so this I think is liable to be the
reason that there's not a single
University in the US that still
functions really you think that you
think that's why yeah I think if we if
you had one University that functioned
then certainly that would be the place
everybody wanted to send their kids I
mean I have two College age kids if
there was a university that still made
sense it's the obvious place for them to
go why don't they make sense anymore in
your view they don't make sense
because
um well there's multiple layers you've
got a scientific apparatus that is very
powerful when it comes to finding the
truth and very fragile when it comes to
resisting perverse incentives as in like
wokeism wokeism impresses to be
politically correct exactly so where
where is the American University that
stood up and said I'm sorry but men
can't become women MH right they can
live as women they can addesses women
there are surgeries there are
Pharmaceuticals there's nothing you can
do that takes your birth sex and changes
it to the opposite one not a single
University said that anywhere bizarre
this is quite um personal to you because
I was reading actually earlier today
about what happened to you at University
at Evergreen State University and it's
funny because um I watched the videos of
that event and I don't know whether it's
because we now have some distance
between those events now
but I just want to say I think what you
did was the right thing and I think
history has made you look more and more
correct as time has gone on because I I
watched it and it just seemed to be a
bunch of people living in some kind of
collective delusion these like people
shouting at you in this hallway um for
people that aren't aware as I wasn't
aware before before I knew you were on
your way here can you explain what
happened there because I think it's kind
of um evidence of this sort of
collective delusion that you're talking
about sure um there's a
little uh
a little difficulty because there's the
public story of what happened right the
the public narrative settled on a set of
facts that isn't exactly right it's not
so far off that it doesn't make the
point but the basic thing that happened
is that my wife and I were very popular
professors at a very liberal school that
had a uh a very unusual teaching model
so the school was called The Evergreen
State College it still
exists The Evergreen State College was
founded by radicals who threw out every
single structure that would exist in a
normal college or university there were
no departments there were no grades the
administrators did not have the ability
to tell you what you had to teach there
were no requirements about how you
taught um and if you were the kind of
person that was interested in figuring
out what new might be done in the
teaching environment if you wanted to
figure out a new way to teach it was the
perfect
place that said many people took the
freedom that the college offered and
they squandered it they weren't really
interested in doing anything other than
reducing their workload so the college
was kind of divided between the
professors who thought that this Freedom
was this gift and we used it um we ended
up being popular and then there were
other Prof professors who didn't and
they were much less popular but in any
case Heather was literally the college's
most popular professor she's your wife
yes uh she's my wife and the co-author
of that book you have in front of you um
she was the most popular Professor I
wasn't too far
behind we both had the equivalent of
tenure although the place didn't
formally have tenure it had something
like it and so we were not
vulnerable we were liberated to say what
needed to be said and what happened is
the college hired a new president a guy
named George bridges for whatever reason
George Bridges wanted
to completely reimagine the college as a
much more standard much less interesting
place and in order to do that he didn't
really have the power because the
founders of the college had created a
place where the faculty were in a
position to just simply say no and we
would have so what he did did in order
to overcome the faculty was he impanel a
diversity equity and inclusion committee
hand
selected and he incited
a at first cold and increasingly hot uh
battle over
race um it was my job to explain to my
colleagues and to anyone involved in the
decision-making process process why the
plan that they were proposing would be a
disaster for the
college and although I did have
trepidations about standing up
because the environment was quite
charged like I said I was a popular
Professor I had the equivalent of tenure
and you know the worst that could happen
is people are going to call me
names so I did stand up I stood up at a
fact fault meeting and the faculty was
in the process of voting for a
resolution to force every member of The
Faculty to explain what progress that
they had made in the previous year
against their own
racism right now
worse not only were we voting to mandate
ourselves to reflect on our own progress
Against Racism that was simply assumed
to
exist but these documents in which we
reflected would become official
documents that would then be utilized in
promotion decisions firing decisions
these sorts of things so the point was
that's a Mech that's a takeover because
you're I you know in my reflection
annually I would say well actually I'm
not a racist I've made very little
progress because there wasn't an issue
to begin with and the answer is well oh
my God he's worse than we thought right
he doesn't even recogniz his internal
racism right so it was going to be that
conversation again it didn't threaten me
because I already had tenure but
nonetheless I had to say to my
colleagues look this is a terrible
mistake and I stood up at the faculty
meeting and I said this and it of course
caused a stir several people came up to
me after the vote and they said we agree
with you but only one other person voted
with me across the entire faculty
medium 70 votes that went the other
direction um and one year later to the
day I didn't realize that it was the
one-year anniversary of that event until
months later but one year later to the
day 50 students that I had never met I
had never met a single one of them
streamed through my classroom door
accusing me of racism and demanding that
I resign or be
fired now I later came to understand
that these 50 students that I'd never
met had been sent by
my faculty colleague who had become my
Nemesis they had been sent to create the
impression
of white Professor being accused of
racism by students blah blah blah you
can imagine in 2017 what that would have
looked like except that it didn't go as
they planned
because as I mentioned before
I had a teaching environment in which I
knew my students extremely well not only
did I know their names but I knew their
backgrounds I knew their histories I
knew their styles of thought
their uh their disabilities I knew them
really well and they knew me really well
because we went to class every day and
we simply talked about biology which
brought us issues about their
perspectives so I think what was
expected was that when these protesters
streamed through my classroom door in
2017 if you've got a bunch of students
accusing a professor of racism that that
professor's students are going to jump
right on it they're all going to have
gripes about you know some grade that
they got that they thought wasn't wasn't
fair and so they expected me to end up
being faced with with a mob of students
swearing that I was a racist now not a
single one of my students turned on me
in fact many of them spoke courageously
on my behalf including students of color
which then created a kind of Rift in the
universe because when people from the
outside world saw video video that was
uploaded by the protesters themselves
who were proud of what they were doing
the world I didn't sound like a racist
to them and what's more there were all
of these students saying it was was
nonsense so it was I think the case that
that
broke the the woke narrative
because it just didn't add
up and in any case that's how I ended up
doing what I'm doing is that the world
actually recognized that there was
something as you say that there was a
delusion going on and that was apparent
enough in my lack of fear over the
accusation in my students willingness to
actually stand up and say that it was a
a bum rap I I will also just point out
my students of color who spoke up on my
behalf they actually faced the worst
retribution because in order for the
woke Revolution to
function you can't very well have people
of color standing by a white Professor
it just breaks the whole thing so anyway
they needed to be punished from the
point of view of this protest so that it
wouldn't happen again and my wife and I
ended up resigning our oh there there's
another aspect of the story that I
should probably
mention when this protest happened
um there was a lot of drama the protest
spread from those 50 students who
confronted me at my classroom to a
campus-wide Riot that went on for
days the president of the college who
was indirectly responsible for all of
this ordered the police who were a
campus police department they were real
police but they were under his Direction
he ordered them to stand down so they
locked themselves inside their police
station and were literally
forbidden to
intervene students started patrolling
the campus as if they were the police
patrolling the campus with weapons they
started stopping traffic on a public
road passing through campus looking for
me the police called me up to warn me
about this and they told me they
couldn't protect me
and
um it was on fast forward a test of the
claims of these
revolutionaries right they have this
sort of anarchist vibe to them that if
we can just simply get rid of the cops
that we will we will govern ourselves
and it will be beautiful and instead it
became a dangerous violent Riot on the
scale of days and in 2017 the same year
that this happened you resigned from the
college and you got to pay out
essentially yep I asked this question
because we were talking about newspapers
and then we we moved to the education
system and you said that there's not not
a university in the land that's still
doing what it's supposed to do so it
felt somewhat correlated linked to to
what you were saying because it kind of
sets the backdrop of he maybe why you
you have you know clear personal
experience here but also what you saw
there was kind of a symptom I think of
some of the pressures that are being
applied to the scientific education
institution that are stopping it being
able to do what it should be doing 100%
it's doing the inverse of what it should
do it's indoctrinating people uh and you
know the tragedy of it is that the
people who are indoctrinated end up
hurting themselves yeah right they have
an opportunity and they will squander it
on a fiction and in the end it will not
result in them
being uh hireable right they've learned
they've learned how to demand things of
the system rather than to contribute
something to it and that's not their
fault I mean at some point it becomes
their fault but that's the that's the
failure of those who were charged with
delivering them in education to do so
it's it's educational malpractice you
cited this as one of your big concerns
you started talking about basically the
the loss of the media um what is the
what is the downstream implications of
that because that it just I just feel
like I'll get my media in other places
I'll just go on X I'll you know that's
not going to cause any issues with
Society well
um I
believe the consequence of it is
something that I call The cartisian
Crisis cartisian crisis cartisian a
reference to Renee deart and the reason
I reference him is that he had a kind of
philosophical
freakout where he
realized that almost everything that he
took to be a fact he had not tested
himself and therefore all of those facts
that felt objective were really
Downstream of somebody's Authority and
he realized how dangerous that was
and in fact it results in one of his
most famous contributions to humanity
which is the uh what masquerades as a
proof of his existence I think therefore
I am um now I don't think it is a very
good proof right maybe it works for him
he can prove to himself that he exists
but why we should take his word for the
fact that he exists you know if a
computer said I think therefore I am it
doesn't make it true so in any case we
can remember that Dart was troubled by
the fact that he couldn't establish any
facts um in any way other than to take
somebody's word for the fact that that's
what they were we are increasingly
living in a world where the chain of
logic of evidence of reason that might
allow us to have some confidence in a
fact is breaking down and this problem
is going to get worse and worse course
not only is every single truth seeking
institution captured or
broken but AI is going to change the
very nature of what it means for
something to
be a fact right if you can have a
compelling video of you saying something
that you never once said right well you
know if I show you a video of you saying
something last week that you didn't say
you're going to be pretty darn sure you
didn't say it but if I show you
something that you said 15 years ago you
may not be so certain other people won't
be so certain so what I think this is
going to do is is going to produce a an
allergic reaction to
belief and it is going to cause a
cynicism about factual material that is
going to make it impossible for us to
interact with each other to govern
ourselves it's just there's no future in
a world in which we can't figure out
here is what I believe and here is why I
believe it all right that is an
essential
feature doesn't the internet just become
a bit of a wasteland in such a case and
we'll I was thinking of sort of
political comment
commentators is is it likely that there
might just become a channel which we
switch to which is a verified channel to
watch you know Donald Trump or rishy
sunak or the prime ministers talking and
to get our news source where we know
that particular channel is truth and
then we assume that the Internet is just
a wasteland of dis
misinformation well the problem is if
you had such a channel boy would that be
a prize if you controlled it right oh
yeah if you've got the fact Channel then
oh the world's your oyster you're you're
now Emperor so were there going to be a
fact Channel it would get captured and
that's the world we're living in now I
will say the idea that there are no
institutions that work is the flip side
of another idea which I I goes by the um
the phrase zero is a special number and
what I mean by zero is a special
number is that when you have zero
universities that work zero newspapers
that report the news zero social media
Platforms in which you are allowed to
speak freely One World unfolds but a
single exception in any of those spaces
changes the overall Dynamic and the
reason for that is because if you had
one social media platform in which
people were truly free to seek the truth
to discuss anything and everything and
nothing bad happened to them and they
weren't deboosted or any of that then
that's obviously where all of the people
who want an adult conversation are going
to go right you don't want to be treated
like a child you want to have a
conversation in which you can actually
entertain all possibilities reject those
for which there's no evidence Etc so if
you get one platform then people are
going to go to it and if people go to
that one platform it's going to force
the other platforms to deliver something
similar so the competitive environment
means that a single exception can
actually changed the whole landscape and
we are in a battle I don't think X has
achieved that status of being completely
free but it's certainly Freer than the
other platforms and it is having an
effect it is changing the dynamic and it
is in part why the co narrative broke
wide open why the political narrative in
the US is
uh becoming radically different than it
was even a few years ago so the question
is are we going to see an exceptional
University break the trend and become
the next Harvard because you'd be crazy
to send your kid anywhere else are we
going to see somebody put together a
newspaper in which they get all of the
subscribers because you'd be crazy to
get your news from a propaganda Source
when they was a real source so
hopefully courageous people will
recognize it's not as hopeless as as we
are led to believe a single exception
can change the whole dynamic I'm
actually quite shocked at the impact
that Elon buying Twitter um now called X
has had on so many things and even quite
frankly the the impact I'm starting to
see it have on someone like Mark
Zuckerberg at at meta I watched an
interview yesterday with
Mark who I think met had previously
banned Trump from being able to talk on
the platform basically saying that he's
pretty badass and I do not believe he
would have been able to say that had X
and Twitter not
changed I agree with you and I think
that actually if you start looking for
other examples of that pattern you will
see them everywhere there are certain
things that once had magical power that
no longer do the claim that somebody is
a conspiracy theorist does not cause
them to be shunned from society in fact
my feeling is when I hear somebody's a
conspiracy theorist my question is oh
are they any good at
it um but same thing is true
for uh the idea of an
antivaxer right well you know okay
somebody's an antivaxer is that because
they reflexively believe that no such
thing could work or is this somebody
with an injured kid who has legitimate
questions right we've just seen the
leading proponent of vaccines publish a
paper in which he acknowledges that the
testing to establish that they were safe
was never done so we're living in a
whole different world and I think it's
uh it is a symptom of musk primarily
having broken the dynamic by as he said
said paying $44 billion uh because that
was the price of free speech you
mentioned AI there in your sort of list
of concerns pressing concerns where does
where does AI feel and it feels like
it's come out of nowhere you know
because if we go back a year um a year
yeah about about a year it wasn't really
front of mind for anybody for the vast
population for the general population
but now it it appears to
be front of everybody's mind any
everyone thinking's
mind I think that's the right way to
view it I think it should be top of mind
and not because it is
independently uh everything that its
worst critics imagine in fact I have my
doubts about the safest crowd and their
demands for regulation but there's
plenty to worry about in this space um
so I have five different exit
substantial threats that AI
poses um let's see off the top of my
head let's start with the uh the most
fanciful
first AI
could decide that we are its
competitors and it could leverage its
skills and uh decide to eliminate
us I find that unlikely but I don't
think we can discount it
entirely second is the so-called
paperclip problem that an AI that was
very powerful could have
trouble operationalizing a command and
it could result in human extinction and
the example that uh people who think
this way use is if you were to tell a an
AI you wanted it to make as many paper
clips as possible that it could
interpret that as license to go
liquidate the universe and turn it all
into paperclips right not what I meant
but mhm you know but there you have it
and actually I will give a different
example that I think uh maybe functions
better there
are uh people in our intellectual space
who make claims like it would be great
if we were to end all
suffering personally I think that's
about the most insane idea I've ever
heard it's a terrible one you wouldn't
want to live in that world but you can
understand why people think that it
might be a moral obligation now imagine
that you tell an AI hey let's end all
suffering it's actually possible just
drive everything that can suffer extinct
yeah right so the idea that we have a
non-trivial problem figuring out how to
give a powerful AI an instruction that
can't be
misunderstood it's worth worrying about
again I think that one's fanciful too
but it should be on our list but then we
get to the three that I don't think are
easily
dismissed one is that AI is going to
enable uh people with malign
intent
to it's going to enable them more than
it is going to enable those with
benevolent intent and this is an
unfortunate asymmetry that just exists
in the world that a an a moral actor
somebody who has no moral
compass they have total flexibility they
can do whatever a moral person can do
and then they've got a whole list of
other things that they can also do right
whereas a moral person is constrained
they just have the limited set of things
that are available to them so the
question is does AI liberate us all or
does it liberate those who are um
monstrous more than it liberates those
of us who behave like like decent humans
I'm concerned about that I think we are
in some danger of it being leveraged
against us in a way that transforms
things I remember hearing a hacker say
that the malicious hackers the people
with malicious intent are always ahead
of those the sort of ethical hackers
that have benevolent attempt that are
that are good and he he was talking
about how like the you know encryption
systems and password systems he goes the
hackers always ahead and the defense
systems that companies are trying to put
in place are always behind because the
Hacker's intent is obviously always to
find new ways of breaking the current
system whereas the people that defend
security systems are just trying to
defend against the known um forms of
attack so someone in I don't know some
kid in Russia right now could be at his
computer figuring out new ways to use a
large language model to attack systems
and new ways whereas the people who are
working to defend that are currently
just trying to figure out how to um m
the risks of current weapons so it's
it's you know what I mean like the the
attackers are always thinking forward
really yep do you think the general
public and also just institutions and
governments are currently
underestimating the profundity and the
impact that AI is going to have on the
planet yes and in fact I think we are
crossing over what would be described as
an event
horizon so an event horizon I think the
term initially comes from an
understanding of what happens at a black
hole that there's a point at which light
is pulled back in and so you can't see
beyond it MH right there's literally no
mechanism to see beyond it we are
crossing a threshold that none of us can
see beyond and that is inherently
frightening are people underestimating
they are simultaneously underestimating
and overestimating right the the fear of
being turned into a paperclip is
overblown in my opinion
the fear of well I've just gotten to the
third one on the list the fourth one on
the list is a total collapse in
our understanding of the world around us
and each
other that the way in which an
artificial intelligence interfaces with
our human API with our
interface is
profound
already and we're not very far in right
I'm already looking at Little movies
that this thing makes and I'm not just
talking about the clip of the cat
walking through the garden right little
vignettes I'm talking about actual
movies in which characters of a madeup
species are having a
conversation about humans
right okay
that's a hell of a
moment where will we be in 5
years it it's unimaginable how much
change that is going to create because
we have no evolutionary preparedness at
all for living in a world
where the product of a
computer can out compete the product of
a human in narrative
space that's a dangerous world to live
in because narratives are so profoundly
important to who we are stories yeah
stories stories are what we're all about
you know even profound ideas
are unfathomable until somebody has
written them into a story that people
can can Gro but also language just
generally is I don't think um I was
listening to something the other day
which was just making the case for how
our our entire Society is pretty much
held together with with language and
it's so interesting that large language
models were really the thing that blew
open this conversation about AI because
we don't realize that like like my every
relationship I have is held together
with language in fact all my passwords
are language the way that I think the
way that I understand the world is
through language so if there's a a super
intelligent species that has a better
grasp of language and a certain level of
autonomy um it's hard to think you know
it's interesting because what made us
dominate the world was I think was our
intelligence and our and then our
ability to collaborate through through
language and communication and this is
the the very thing that AI has entered
the scene with well I will tell you I
wrote a piece and I keep meaning to
release it just so people can see I
didn't get it exactly right but many
years ago I wrote a piece in which I
said that I believed that artificial
intelligence was going to emerge from
the project to get a computer to
translate seamlessly between two
languages and I explained why that would
be the thing that cracked the uh the nut
and that is what happened for a reason
the reason is
because the relationship between human
language and
Consciousness
is profound and largely
unknown so U Heather and I descri cribed
this model in in our book hun gathers
Guide to the 21st century human beings
are a unique
species the primary way in which we are
unique is that if you if you think about
the question about
well what do human beings do right if I
say you know what does a tiger do right
we could describe the things that a
tiger does to meet its caloric needs to
get the materials necess Neary to
maintain its body to produce Offspring
right we could describe the niche of the
tiger can't really do that with people
right what do we do sometimes we Farm
the oceans sometimes we hunt big game on
land sometimes we terraform a piece of
territory and we plant crops we do a lot
of different things and if you think
about all the things that human beings
have done for our entire history as a
species it's immense The Collection so
we are unlike any other species because
our Niche is the movement between niches
both over time and across
space so how does that work well we have
a tool that no other species has when
you think about the question of what
makes human beings special the answer
really is language and the reason that
it's language is that language allows
the breaching of the boundary between
one mind and another so that ability
allows human beings to pull their
cognitive capacity and what Heather and
I argue in our book is that the the way
human beings get through time is they
oscillate between two
modes when the ancestors when your
ancestors know how to exploit the
habitat that you live in then you take
take their wisdom in all of the stories
that it's encoded in and you apply it
maybe you build it out a little bit you
figure out how to do something the
ancestors didn't quite know how to do
but mostly what you're doing is just
applying the toolkit that you've been
handed to the problems that it works on
but what happens when you get on a canoe
and you cross some body of water and the
place you've landed doesn't have the
same plants and animals that your
ancestors knew well it's not like they
they got Dumber but it they stuff is
less applicable so what you do is you
pull your cognitive capacity you and all
the people in your tribe and you talk
about well what are the opportunities
here and what might you do about them
you know I saw an animal this morning
and it looked like it might be uh pretty
good eating but I don't know how you're
going to catch one well what if we were
to drive it into that Canyon right that
sort of thing so by pooling our
cognitive Resources by reaching a
collective Consciousness which is the
inverse of that cultural mode of the
ancestors the conscious mode when we
Face novelty allows us to come up with
new Solutions and then to refine them
and when we've got it nailed well then
we're the ancestors who knew what to do
and our stories get driven into that
cultural layer and they get handed on
generation after generation and then
eventually they run out of usefulness
and we have to return to consciousness
and come up with a new way so that's
what human beings do both spreading
across space and moving through time
they oscillate between that cultural
mode of the ancestors and the conscious
mode of what the hell do we do now so I
want to make sure I fully understand
this um as if a 10-year-old would
understand it is we have kind of two
modes we have what we had passed to us
and because of Consciousness and
language and our ability to communicate
we have what we we're discovering now
about the nature of the world and I
think the very pres the very presence of
a skyscraper is quite an interesting
thing because it's built
on the knowledge passed to us from
people that no longer live with also you
know if the skysc SK skyscraper has
something on top of it like a it's solar
powered or something much of that
understanding has come from our current
thinking of the people that live right
now so you have the combination of uh
relatives from the past that are no
longer here all of their Collective
knowledge and you have the collective
knowledge that we're discussing and
thinking through now together that's
what makes humans so special and really
what ties that all together is language
and the ability to
communicate right it is that ability to
communicate whether you're in the
cultural mode where you're picking up
the stories of your ancestors so that
you know what to do or you're in that
conscious mode where you're parallel
processing the problems of the moment
and figuring out what new solution you
might come up with and the orang Tang
can't do that no other creature comes
anywhere close it's so many orders of
magnitude different from the next near
and I'm not arguing that other animals
aren't smart there are plenty of smart
animals this is a whole different kind
of smart this is a smart where it's
impossible to actually draw the boundary
between my smart and your smart right
there's a collective smart it's very
real you can't locate it right it has to
do with some ancient
mechanism for pooling understanding and
pooling understanding isn't even like he
everybody bring your understanding it's
like you know what what I don't trust
that guy's understanding because I've
seen him screw up and not fix it that
guy he sounds crazy but he's got a track
record actually I take what he says very
seriously so it's like a there's a
waiting of who whose input plays what
role somebody might have Insight in one
realm and be unreliable in another that
ability to figure out how to take the
sum total of all of the different skill
sets that people bring to the table and
come out of it with something like a
proposal for what we do next right that
is a
profound adaptive process that we don't
even have a name for and AI changes this
well AI scrambles it because on the one
hand I can make the
argument that AI is like a a flint
napped blade it's just another tool and
it is is just another tool at one level
on the other hand because you know the
blade you're in pretty big trouble when
a blade starts talking to you you know
what I'm saying that's a bad moment
that's you need to lay off the mushrooms
at that point right in this case the
blade the tool that we've
created it is talking to
us in fact it's sensitive to what we
think about what it says to us we
means it
is it is
certain that you will have an
evolutionary process in which the AI
gets exquisitely good at telling us what
we want to
hear there's nothing more dangerous than
that you want an AI that tells you what
you need to know whether or not you want
to hear it right that would be a useful
tool an AI that responds to the fact
that you think that what it said is good
oh my God we are we are going to end up
in a
um I'm struggling for a better metaphor
than an infinite Hall of Mirrors but
that's what it's going to be it's going
to be a big fractal Hall of Mirrors in
which you can't be certain of stuff and
I will say because I know that um
there's a lot of concern you've got a
kind of safest crowd that wants to
regulate AI because the dangers are
profound and you've got a bunch of other
people who think regulating AI is
dangerous and what I've realized is that
failing to regulate AI is dangerous
regulating it is
worse regulating AI is worse oh yeah why
well for one thing you create an
asymmetry between those who abide by the
regulation and those that don't so say
China won't have a regulation but
America do have one right do you want to
be ruled by whoever violates your
regulation I don't but that's what we
effectively guarantee if we create that
uh Dynamic so I don't like the idea of
heading across the Event Horizon created
by AI without a plan I really don't like
that idea that's not safe on the other
hand the
alternative is only going to make that
problem worse so somehow we have to face
this with our eyes wide
open I mean how does one face it with
their eyes wide open I mean all I'm
hearing is you can do nothing about it
well I don't know that you can do
nothing about it here's what I want to
know why are we
not obsessed with
tracking the thought process of the AIS
in other words if there were one
thing that I would want it's AIS to
report how they arrived where they did
so that when the catastrophe happens we
can figure out why it happened we could
potentially get through this very
perilous Moment by coming to understand
it and becoming wise about how to
leverage
this so I do think there are things to
do but what is not wise is the sort
of naive oh I'm just going to get to the
point where I realize that regulating AI
makes problems worse and now I'm not
going to worry about it right that I
think I think not regulating it is the
right thing to do and worrying about
about it tremendously is also the right
thing to
do I also think about a world I think
maybe the world that Elon is really
trying to create where we are able to
interface with AI via brain interface
devices like neuralink you know it's
interesting because I I watched elon's
narrative emerge around Nal Link at the
very start and he was very focused on
being able to interface with AI that was
all all the interviews he was doing at
the time were centered on the reason why
I'm doing neuralink is because we need
to be able to interface with this
technology or else we're going to get
left behind and then more recently it's
become about allowing people that can't
use their arms and legs to use them
again which I think is maybe a marketing
spin but at the heart of his narrative
and other people's narratives is that we
are probably all going to have these
brain um interface devices put into our
brains or maybe outside of our bodies if
you'll look at some of the other
companies so that we can interface with
AI and I mean that fundamentally changes
what humans are we become side side
borgs or something yes it's not the time
we will have fundamentally changed what
humans are though and I think this is an
important thing to realize is that we do
we do this regularly you know the
printing press did this television did
this the internet did this
and you know the uh the gloom and doom
crowd each time has said oh my God if
you print books it's going to cause our
minds to become feeble because you won't
need to remember and the funny thing is
I think in each case the gloom and
doomers were right there's definitely an
element that they correctly spotted
what's difficult to do is or impossible
is to look over the Event Horizon and
say what does it
mean and in this
case what does it mean right are we
going to get through this incredibly
perilous period and look back on this
you know the way we look back at the
cell phone right the cell phone oh no
it's going to destroy human sociality
it's going to you know it's going to do
that well it did drove us crazy
absolutely insane so yeah AI is going to
be that and worse and that the only
thing to do is to try to understand that
change so we can mitigate the harm and
hopefully re in the overarching pattern
of hyper novelty that we are cre for
ourselves do you think this technology
is comparable to any of
those
it's like those but 50 times worse I
mean the phone was really a tragic
innovation in many ways and it's not the
phone itself I
actually I I sometimes say it's not the
box it's the business model right a
phone is a terrifically enabling
device
and it has made us more powerful it has
made us more
fragile I was talking to to Heather
about um the problem if if we Face a
major disruption right if solar flare
takes out uh the grid and you have to
get
home well do you have a
map because not so long ago you could
have bought a map on
paper now the fact that we have these
maps in our phones means that the
ability to buy the map doesn't even
exist anymore where would you I'm not
even sure where I would go to find a map
so we are less secure than we were
because we are so hyper enabled in the
present and
um yeah we're we're in for some really
interesting
times I will just say to completed I've
gotten through four of the five uh
existential threats that conceivably
come from the a I at least as far as I
can spot it the last one is the most
mundane and that's just the massive
economic disruption that's coming from a
technology that will take what most
people do for a living and make it
useless there's a lot of people at the
moment kind of denying this fact that I
think they'll be
fine yep is there anyone that will be
fine and who are those people and who
won't be fine and what's the I guess the
important part as well when we think
about this disruption is the speed of
disrup ruption because that that gives
us a clue as to how long we'll have to
adjust as a society find new jobs
upskill people learn train maybe go to
find something else to
do most people are not going to be able
to retrain for something
that will be
relevant I think and in fact the advice
I've given my kids is invest
in
tools invest in a toolkit a cognitive
toolkit that works for a future that you
cannot
imagine right if you five years ago
people were saying learn to
code that was bad advice yeah okay
that's something that AI can
do if however you invest in things that
cause an upgrade to the quality of your
thinking if you invest in the kinds of
skills that can be mapped onto new
Realms then I can't promise you'll be
all right but you'll be a lot better off
than people whose skill set is so
narrowly focused on some task that made
sense in 2024 that in
2027 they're a drift you know be a
generalist invest in clear thinking
figure out who you can trust develop
your interpersonal relationships maybe
that should even have been the head of
the list right people who you can depend
on who have the Insight the values that
makes them worthy of your investment in
them and know them in person so that no
matter what happens if the forces that
wish to confuse us leverage AI to get in
between us which would not be a terrible
description of what happened during Co
except that AI was presumably not a big
player but if people try to get in
between us they're going to have a lot
easier time doing it if your
relationship with somebody is
intermediated by a
screen you want to know people in person
so that you can turn off the screen and
you can say do you know what the hell is
going on what do you think what did you
see what did you hear what what do you
think is occurring right you want to be
able to have that conversation with
somebody who's a real flesh and blood
human who uh you know who you're willing
to to go all in with are there any
careers that if your children turned to
you and said you know Dad what sh what
career should I do in a world where AI
is getting smarter by the
weak
um the funny thing is that almost
strikes me I know you don't intend it
this way but it's almost a trick
question at this moment right anybody
body who thinks they know how to answer
it is probably at least kidding
themselves it is it is that you know
it's like if we were let's say we found
ourselves you know a drift
uh on an outrigger in the middle of you
know the South
Pacific we don't know if we're going to
survive and you want to know hey well if
we do if we find some land what do we do
then and it's like well I don't know
um but let's find the land and then
let's think very carefully about what to
do when we get there so but if your kid
literally came up to you would you say
that to your kid yeah so but they say
well Dad I'm do I go to school
University do what do I do I think the
question that you're really asking is
what would you do in their shoes which
is not really a career question
MH what I would do in their
shoes is I would if I was going to go to
college I would make damn sure that I
left college with a tangible project
that I had accomplished that I could
establish was my own that proved I was
competent right if you develop something
I don't care if it does something useful
or not right it could be you ever seen
um a most useless machine no a most
useless machine is kind of an
interesting thing uh the classic version
of it is it's a little box with a switch
on the top and if you flip the switch a
hand comes out and flips it back the
other way goes back in the box right
totally useless but the point is look
anybody who can make a most useless
machine well I know something about
their skill set so what I'm saying is I
don't want to see anybody's
transcript I don't know why your
transcript says what it does I don't
know that your professors knew what they
were talking about right it's not useful
but if you show me a most useless
machine and the answer is okay if you
really made that then I know a you know
something about prototyping B you know
how to uh manage a project C I know that
your motivational structure allows you
to go from the concept to a finished
project that actually works Etc so I
know a bunch of things that your
transcript can't tell me um now a
recommendation from the right person
might mean something you know who was
really the right person but a
recommendation from a random person I
don't know that just says you're
marvelous I don't know what that means
um but so one thing is make damn sure
you graduate with something that you can
show other people that is
unfakeable um the other thing that I
have told them
is if you invest in a skill well one of
my sons asked me about electrical
engineering what did I think about
electrical engineering I said I think
electrical engineering is great but it's
not
enough if you go into electrical
engineering you are going to face a huge
number of people who also went into
electrical engineering who are very good
at what they do and maybe you're just
awesome what you do but distinguishing
yourself in a world where you've got a
bunch of competitors many of them maybe
they're not as likable and so they have
more time to just dedicate to Pure
electrical engineering you don't want to
compete it's not a it's not a winning
bet
however if
you if you invest in electrical
engineering and one or two other things
that have some relation to it well maybe
you're the only person on Earth who has
the skill set to to combine these things
so that you come up with something
that's unique and then it doesn't have
to be perfect and you don't want to have
to make perfect things perfect things
are almost impossible to make the
expense of making something perfect is
through the roof you're exactly that
reason of diminishing returns you'd much
rather bring something to the world
that's novel and useful and then let
other people perfect it right that's
where you want to be so combining things
that are not usually combined is one way
to distinguish yourself and tangible
product that actually establishes that
you have those
characteristics and then the hidden
punchline there is if you say okay my
dad told me uh I need to make a project
that makes it clear what skill set I
have and you set out to do it you know
what you're going to find out what
skills you don't have yeah right if your
motivational structure is broken you're
going to learn that and then you can fix
it right if you think oh I'm going to
learn the skills I'm in college I better
you know buckle down and get all the
skills in the textbook and then when I
get out I'll start making stuff if you
do that then the point is well when you
get out it's too late to discover that
your motivational structure doesn't
allow you to complete a project or that
you you so dislike failure that when you
make a prototype you don't even realize
what the meaning is all you see is that
it doesn't work very well right on that
fifth point of your AI concerns this
idea of sort of economic turmoil for
whatever reason
um Sam alman's other business called
worldcoin intends to I think it intends
to distribute basically value let's just
to simplify it distribute money to
people in a world where there's been so
much economic disruption that we've kind
of lost our jobs that's kind of how I
understood it so people are going around
the world scanning their retinas on
these machines that have been placed all
over the world and that's going to
become the mechanism to identify you as
a unique individual as a as a as a human
so that they can send you free money
Universal basic income in a world where
people are going to struggle to have
jobs now I I think I've I don't think
I've butchered that too much but do you
believe that world is going to happen
where there's going to be so much
disruption in the labor force that so
many people are going to be unemployed
that we're going to need to just
basically give out money to
people I think that's going to be a
short ride you think it's going to be a
short ride yeah I do what do you mean by
that
unfortunately the story of human
evolution and
competition is it's one of great Triumph
and overcoming adversity in some
chapters and it's one of uh tragedy and
atrocity in
others I am very concerned that
the idea of useless eaters is about to
make a huge comeback and that Ubi
has two impacts Ubi meaning Universal
basic income Universal basic income and
everything that functions like it you
know so some distribution of value one
it's going to make the people who are
creating the value or people who think
they're creating the value resent those
who are absorbing the value just to
live and it is therefore going to
trigger a quest
to reduce that line item on the balance
sheet and there will be all kinds of
excuse making but um it's pretty it it's
pretty ugly I mean we see that in
society already people that are working
hard and that are paying a lot of tax
get resentful towards the people at the
very bottom of the income Spectrum who
are maybe not um working at all and are
getting paid um yeah and and
interestingly another factor in here is
people that earn more money seem to have
less kids
and that becomes a point of contention
in society yep uh so I think you're
seeing the picture and you're you're
exactly you're exactly understanding why
this will turn
into uh the usual demonization of some
set of people uh as a pretext for
getting rid of them so that's bad the
other bad effect that will come from Ubi
is learned
helplessness and I I think we've
actually seen this in fact the woke
Revolution I think is a tragic story
because on the one hand while you know I
was chased out of a job that I loved by
a bunch of people who accused me of
things that I wasn't guilty of in a kind
of
Madness on the other hand how did they
end up
there they ended up there
because they were betrayed
they were betrayed by A system that was
supposed to deliver them a life that
worked it was you know if you did what
you were asked to do if you went to
school if you did the homework you were
supposed to come out of it with a skill
set that would allow you to live a
decent
life and
instead they were given many of them
were
given drugs that we biologically had no
understanding of you know because
somebody was profiting off their
dependency and we sent them to schools
and we provided them with Majors that
they could dedicate themselves to that
weren't real that didn't create skills
or Insight in many cases created exactly
the inverse it created
confusion and at some
point they realized you know
what I don't have a plan and in such a
case those people who don't have skills
that are going to allow them to live a
decent life are going to look for
someone to blame and they're probably
going to R land on the wrong person
right and especially if somebody is
cynically willing to sell them the story
that you know who you should blame it's
straight white guys or something like
that they'll listen and I will say uh
I've done a lot of thinking uh um about
the game theory of human
competition and one thing has struck me
in recent
years which is
that there's a reason that
communism continues to
reemerge it doesn't work so why would
people keep Landing there and I think it
is
unfortunately the natural
consequence of a
a a meritocracy that does not take care
of those who
lose if you have a meritocracy where the
way to have a decent life is to figure
out how to provide something that people
want right but you don't have a plan for
the people who try that and it doesn't
work for whatever
reason then what you will end up with is
a large number of people who will
correctly understand that they are on
the losing end of a bargain those people
don't have an investment in keeping that
system running they want to overturn it
and in fact with some cause they will
look at all of the fortunes that have
been created in that meritocracy and
they will say you realize how much of
that is illegitimate do you realize how
much of that was parasitic we want it
back and so I think communism is you
know game theoretically it can't be made
to work it has a fundament mental flaw
at its heart which is that it punishes
those who contribute and it rewards
those who don't such a system will
inherently be
unproductive everyone that knows me
knows that my downtime is spent watching
football I'm a big Manchester United fan
and if I can't make it to the game I'll
be watching wherever I am in the world
with Nord VPN who sponsor this podcast
and they allow me to switch my virtual
location to a country where the match is
streaming so I never miss a game you're
probably thinking but what about viruses
well there threat protection feature
keeps you safe from viruses malware and
fishing sites so that's something you'll
never have to worry about when you're
using it plus you can use one nordvpn
account on up to 10 devices which is
really helpful sometimes I'm on my phone
and sometimes I'm on my laptop or my
iPad for a limited time the nordvpn team
have kindly offered the D Community an
exclusive deal just head to nordvpn.com
doac or use the link in the description
below for a huge discount plus four
extra months on your 2-year plan and
with nordvpn's 30-day money back
guarantee there is absolutely no risk
try it at nordvpn.com doac or click the
link in the description
below is there anything else that exists
on your list of
concerns that we haven't crossed um so
we've covered AI the solar flight issue
yeah there is a big concern that I have
so
I Heather and I on our podcast spend a
lot of time sorting out the landscape of
the co
debacle
and what we saw was quite dark virtually
everything that we were told was upside
down and backwards if you wanted to know
medically what you should do about covid
you literally couldn't do better than
looking at what the CDC told you and
doing the inverse of all of it right
they got every single thing wrong which
is improbable what's the CDC for anyone
that doesn't know Center for Disease
Control should probably be renamed the
Center for Disease because they resulted
in it spreading farther and having worse
impacts but
nonetheless I sometimes say certain
stories diagnose the system right you
can see what's wrong with your system by
the way a particular story flows through
it you can see the complete collapse of
Journalism through the co story you can
see
the utter dereliction of Duty of our
universities from that story you can see
the Brokenness of our political
institutions our courts all of this they
all failed and you can see where we live
based on that story
alone but unfortunately in the US the
two major
parties both have their fingerprints all
over the failure and neither of them
want to talk about it so aside from a
few exceptions people who shined during
this period mostly there's a tcid
agreement to move
on and I think it's a terrible error
what was the
failing well I would point to three and
a half separate
failures one the
covid crisis and mind you all of the
words here need caveats I do believe
that there was a pathogen SARS K2 I do
not believe that we had anything that
would by the prior definition be called
a pandemic I do not believe it was
inherently an
emergency but nonetheless these are the
terms we use the covid
pandemic was some kind of emergency we
were delivered something wrongly called
vaccines we were prop propagandized into
avoiding off-patent drugs that really
did work and
so uh and you know we made our situation
vastly worse we locked down which
injured people we put masks on children
which literally disrupted their normal
developmental
processes we kept vaccinating and
revaccinated which has created an an
entire landscape of Adverse Events and
early deaths which we are still not
being honest
about so the three and a half Realms are
the
origin of the virus which is all but
certain to have been laboratory and very
probably the Wuhan Institute but the
Wuhan Institute isn't the Wuhan
Institute of virology it's also
connected to uh the NIH Anthony fouchy
this enhancement this gain of function
research that was embarked upon was
Downstream of a weapons
program and what's gain of function
research gain of function research is
where various techniques are employed to
give a pathogen in this case a virus
capabilities that it didn't otherwise
have okay so what I I think happened in
the origin of Co we can now tell a
pretty good story you have a
vast um network of
Laboratories working to find new
pathogens that can be turned into
weapons what story they tell themselves
about why we need these weapons I don't
know but it is clear that if you are
working to enhance human health or you
say you are that you are allowed to to
enhance The lethality of germs as part
of a dual use
program so the excuse is oh we're
working to prepare the world from a
pandemic it's not a matter of if it's a
matter of when right that's what they
tell us it's not true the likelihood of
a pathogen leaping from nature to humans
is actually quite remote for reasons
that it took me a long time to realize
but I now get it loud and clear
pathogens don't jump from animals to
humans very easily because it's not an
easy jump right they have to do two
tricks and they have to do it in Rapid
succession in order for it to work the
first trick is they have to actually
infect a human
being the second trick is before that
human being dies or gets better they
have to learn to jump to a second human
being that is not an easy trick so what
human beings have done is they have
started accelerating that process in
Laboratories that are spe specifically
attempting to
create these highly path
pathogenic um creatures that infect
people for the purpose of creating
weapons
so what happened in Wuhan I believe is
there was a case where some Chinese
miners who were working in a mine that
was full of bats they were actually
literally shoveling bat guano out of
this
mine six of them became sick and three
of them
died none of them made anybody else sick
and they were all compromised because
they were breathing this dust in in the
mine which made them vulnerable but the
fact that six miners got sick from a
virus in this mine told the folks at the
Wuhan Institute of virology who were
connected directly to some American
researchers told them aha there is a
virus in a cave in yam Province and the
virus already knows one of the two
tricks it can infect a human what we
need to do is find that virus and
enhance it so that we have a virus that
can spread between people why would they
want a virus that can spread between
people because they're part of a cryptic
weapons program ah okay now if that
sounds preposterous to you and I can
imagine that it would I can imagine
myself 5 years ago thinking that sounds
absolutely ridiculous and uh paranoid
frankly I would I would suggest that
people read Robert Robert F Kennedy
Jr's uh most recent book it's called the
Wuhan coverup in which he explores at
Great length this weapons program and
it's probable link to SARS K to it is
also Al worth reading the book he wrote
before that the real Anthony fouchy when
one comes to understand that the reason
that Anthony fouchy was the highest paid
federal worker in the US bar
nun that's because he was the head of a
weapons program disguised as a public
health program okay so Anthony fouchy is
the guy that I saw on TV telling giving
us advice on what to do about this
pandemic he was he was the guy and he
was like the medical advisor guy the
medical advisor guy but the funny thing
is Anthony fouchy is largely responsible
for the gain of function research that
created the virus in the first place
that made it a human pathogen how do we
know that um because we now know that
there was a ban on gain of function
research in the US and that Anthony
fouchy was part of the effort to
Offshore the work to Ralph barck who was
an American researcher still is an
American researcher his Partners in the
Wuhan Institute of virology XI Jang Lee
being the primary so what they did was
they evaded a ban that arose in the US I
believe in 2015 as a result of very
realistic fears that a virus would
escape from gain a function research
they offshored it to the Wuhan Institute
of virology so the work could continue
that was Anthony fouche's work so
somehow he ends up both in a position to
fund and fuel the the research that
creates the virus and then he's the
go-to guy for advice about what we
should do about it that's a very odd
coincidence and it worked out very badly
for planet Earth why would Anthony
fouchy send offshore it to China who are
I would consider to be one of the US's
arch nemesis yeah that is a great
question I don't know the answer to it
you would want China to have that
information it's like developing the
nuclear bomb in Russia or something well
I actually think that uh folks like you
and me
are we don't get
it we think that China is a nation and
America is a nation and that these
nations are
antagonists we don't understand that
actually the United States while it is a
nation is also a set of factions and
those factions don't agree one faction
decided to forbid gain of function
research another faction decided oh no
you don't and we know how to get it done
and it was partnered with some faction
of that Chinese entity you know uh
across the water
and if I if I think about how America
looks to Outsiders right I can imagine
people talking about oh the Americans
are doing this right but if you're
talking about what the Biden
Administration is doing you're not
talking about me the Biden
Administration isn't on my team I'll
guarantee that right so the point is the
Biden Administration is my antagonist
the Americans are a composite of
antagonists I mean I guess in one sense
but I don't know why we offshored
weapons research to China I don't know
that there isn't a partnership between
entities that is much more relevant to
the unfolding of events that simply
doesn't have a name I would recognize
but somehow we know that we did it we
know that the research was forbidden
here and we know you know Ralph baric
trained XI Jang Lee in how to do
techniques including what he calls no CM
edits those are edits you can't
see why would a biologist interested in
studying pathogens in order to make
people healthier care whether you could
see their edits could could it not be
the case that fouchy moved the project
to China the gain of function research
to China was involved in that because he
wanted to come up he wanted to
understand these pathogens these viruses
better so that we could do experiments
on them to better understand them to
figure out how to defend against them
this is exactly what they tell you I'm a
biologist maybe I'm dumb but that story
doesn't make any sense to me you're
going to create a new
virus from a ancestor you've pulled out
of a cave in Yan province that you've
enhanced in some way that you decided to
enhance it it doesn't tell you about
some virus that's going to LEAP out of
nature of its own accord it tells you
about the virus you just created it
doesn't make sense from the point of
view of enhancing human health for two
reasons one there's no demonstrated
evidence that such research has given us
any benefit whatsoever in fighting off
pathogens there's no case in which we've
seen that what we do have are multiple
cases of leaks of pathogens from Labs
studying them so
we've just got a simple comparison what
are the chances if you study some virus
you plucked out of some cave that you're
going to come up with something useful
that's actually going to help us
certainly didn't happen with covid
chances are very low what are the
chances that things going to leak from
your lab and cause a global pandemic um
pretty high
actually I just I just imagine
scientists in the lab would take a
sample of it they'd put it in the lab
they'd start analyzing it they might
start doing tests on it to see how it
responds to certain things and then you
know through no fault of their own maybe
it
leaked okay but let's let's see how that
played
out we've got some genan jocks pulling a
virus out of a unon cave and enhancing
it so that it becomes
a communicable human
pathogen they should in theory in
studying it have come up with
information that would tell us what to
do if such a pathogen ever got out which
it did because they lost control of it
well what did they tell us they told
us don't use Ivermectin don't use
hydroxy chloroquin that what you should
do is you should wait at
home until you're actually your lips are
turning blue then you should come get
medical help
now that's wrong in every
way the right thing to do was to allow
doctors to look at the patients who were
coming into their office and to figure
out how to treat them those doctors
should have said oh this person uh they
appear to be sick with a uh a
respiratory pathogen there's a good
chance that it's an RNA virus they could
have quickly actually ascertained that
it was an RNA virus you know what works
on all RNA viruses
icton then they could have treated it
and they would have oh iacon works for
Co if you give it very early if you give
it in sufficient Doses and if you give
it with
fat okay doctors would have figured that
out on their own instead what we got was
a message from the very people who had
engaged in offshoring this research
ostensibly to figure out how to deal
with covid who then gave us exactly the
inverse of the right advice right then
what did they do well then they told us
the route out of this this is a
vaccine what they delivered was not a
vaccine it was a gene therapy that gene
therapy we were told blocks the
contraction and the
transmission of
covid and what happened was they
demonized everybody who questioned
either the safety or the efficacy or
both of these
treatments turned out that didn't work
so
what we have this is why I say that the
covid
story uh diagnoses the
system if you think and a person could
be well within their rights to think
well I'm sure we were studying the virus
to protect people and that it would tell
us something about what should be done
if it ever were to LEAP into humans well
we got a perfect test of how well that
worked every single thing they told us
to do was wrong and upside down if you
took what they called the vaccine you
put yourself in Jeopardy if you ignored
their advice and you used icton and
hydroxy chloroquine and you used it
early and you used it in sufficient
quantities it actually was highly
effective and actually rendered this uh
illness perfectly manageable for almost
every single
person so we've seen how well they did
they failed across the board do you
think there's malicious intent somewhere
because when people hear these stories
they and because because that the
average Joe doesn't know how systems
above them work they tend to think of
this like Illuminati group of people
coming together deciding this was going
to happen then executing this plan for
some because these you know this this
room of people who are evil who people
refer to as like they um wanted to do
harm and they want to control us that's
the kind kind of conspiracy
narrative um I have no idea what
motivates such people my guess is most
of the people who Park
participated in the programs that did so
much harm thought they were doing the
right thing I don't think that's true
for all of them though I don't think
that's true for Anthony fouchy you you
don't think he thinks he was doing the
right thing I think he knows he's a
weapons guy and that when you're a
weapons guy you are inherently
comfortable with the destruction of
human beings that's what you do for a
living you're trying to create things
that destroy human beings and I don't
know what it would be like
to have such a job I've never had one
but my guess is there is a mechanism for
rationalizing absolutely ghastly things
if what you do for a living is plot the
destruction of
others now you rais this as a concern as
one of your key concerns because I guess
you think we haven't learned all lessons
from this no we haven't um we and I
think things are a little bit inverted
in uh in Britain in the
US there is widespread discussion of the
harms that came from the so-called
vaccines but the question of the
repurposed
drugs uh has still that story has not
broken people still think that iacon on
hydroxy chloroquin don't work and never
worked for Co um I think this story is
in general the inverse
um the vaccine harms are still Taboo in
Britain and there's more acceptance of
of repurposed drugs but really what we
need is a No Holds Barred exploration of
what happened irrespective of what it
was maybe I've got it all wrong and
maybe that would emerge in an
investigation but we need to look at the
viral Origins how exactly that happened
we need to look at what was done the
coup that public health staged against
medicine in which directives about how
to treat patients came down from on high
rather than the normal medical process
of doctors figuring out how how to treat
their patients empirically and pooling
their
insights and we need to talk about what
happened where these Gene therapies came
from what was understood about the
danger
and uh how it is that we treat all of
the people who frankly did exactly what
they were asked to do and have had their
lives compromised or lost because of
injuries that they were not told were
possible are you at all concerned that
if there is a pandemic that breaks out
now people would be so distrusting in
institutions that we wouldn't be able to
communicate any kind of instructions to
Society at large we wouldn't be able to
tell them what medicine to take we
wouldn't tell them to lock down we
wouldn't be able to tell them pretty
much anything 100% it would be an
absolute nightmare
um but what we do have that we didn't
have in
2020 is a
sizable dedicated group of dissidents
many of whom have lost
jobs who did figure out how to treat the
disease what its implications were
medically what the vaccine harms are how
you mitigate them and we have another
group of people who were able to make
excellent progress on the question of
where did this thing come from and uh
what was the process that created
it so I guess on the one hand yes the
distrusting institutions would make a an
actual pandemic if such a thing happened
um night marish on the other hand we've
got people people that are actually
worthy of our trust but I will say one
other
thing in
2020 I was somewhere in the mainstream
with respect to how much concern I had
over um
xonotic
pandemics seeing what happened during
covid I have come to understand the
world is not nearly as dangerous on
front as we thought even the stories
that we think we know like Spanish Flu
turn out not to mean what we thought
they meant Spanish Flu was largely a
self-inflicted
wound yes there was a flu that
circulated much of what people died from
was bacterial pneumonia that followed on
from that flu which we could currently
treat with antibiotics and much of the
harm that was done in fact what panicked
people tremendously was that young
healthy people were succumbing why
because they were being given huge doses
of aspirin that today would be
understand understood to be lethal so
I'm not convinced that the story of
Spanish Flu is what we thought it was in
the absence of such a story how often is
Humanity faced with a terrifying
pandemic the answer is it's very rare
and the degree to which humans make it
better and not I mean make it worse and
not better is substantial so can we
afford to wait 5 years as we sort out
the truth of what happened during covid
yeah absolutely we can afford to wait
the chances of something 1918 happening
you know in the present is very very low
and our ability to deal with it is much
better so um yeah if if it were mine to
say I would say relax about the xonotic
stuff you've been you've been sold a
bill of goods by a lot of people who
actually wanted to study how to make uh
weaponized
pathogens and pay attention to the
people who have a good track record and
that doesn't mean a perfect track record
it means people who recognized their
mistakes and got smarter over time BR we
spent a lot of time talking about macro
concerns and big things um it's funny
because when I sat down with you I I
what I there's two things I wanted to
talk about which is the macro stuff but
also to just get a I guess a bit of a
clear understanding of how our biology
our evolutionary biology and the world
we're living in are misaligned so that
on a day-to-day basis for the next you
know as I navigate through my life the
decisions I make with my food my
partners my relationships the day-to-day
decisions I can make them better now in
that
regard could you give me some advice
sure on how I can live a better life
because I'm aware now of the big macro
picture much of it but on a day-to-day
basis what things can I do to live a
happier healthier
life the
primary alteration that you can make and
none of us can do this perfectly the
world doesn't allow it but we
are beautifully designed for a world we
no longer live
in you have no idea how good your design
is because your design interfaces kind
of poorly with the modern world and so
it sort of feels like Evolution yeah it
did pretty well given what it's made of
but you know it kind of missed the mark
in a lot of ways really not the case uh
if you lived as an ancestor lived in a
world for which they were not only
exquisitly well built but also
brilliantly programmed then you would
see that you lived in a kind of Flow
State and that that flow state was only
broken by the occasional interaction
with something new
right we live in the opposite world
right you have a a food in your pantry
and the question of whether you should
actually put it in your mouth really
hinges on a you know a list of
ingredients some of which you may not
even be able to understand right that's
not normal right um so if you want to
live a
healthier happier more fulfilling life
the key
is
to remove as much of the novelty as you
can from as many of the Realms that
exist in your life as you're able
to what you want to be doing is eating
things that look more or less like what
your ancestors look like is that a
carnivore diet no but it's not a
vegetarian diet either right it's a diet
that has these things in proper
proportion that has the
unadulterated by novel stuff like seed
oils right seed oils
are strangely repurposed lubricants that
people figured out you could sell as
food and then were packaged as if they
were heart healthy it's the inverse of
the truth right olive oil is not a seed
oil avocado oil is not a seed oil those
are safe why because you're eating oil
from the Flesh of a fruit not the seed
plants don't want you eating their seeds
plants reproduce by keeping their seeds
from getting eaten so using detergents
to extract the uh the toxins from a seed
oil is not a safe process so in any case
eating things that make sense
unadulterated things that look like the
actual foods that your ancestors ate
will make
you very much healthier realizing that
in general a state of health is one in
which you are not disrupted until very
late in life your body is built to
function it's built to fix
itself and the
idea that health is a matter of which
pills to take is insane we've been sold
another bill of goods by people who get
rich when we buy pills Pharma is healthy
when we are sick so don't get the idea
that the way to get healthy is to figure
out which things you're deficient in
and you know get some corrective
medicine there are some places where
you're deficient you and I are probably
both deficient in vitamin D right we're
deficient in vitamin D not because human
beings can't make enough vitamin D but
because we live in a novel world where
the UV light that we would have been
interfacing with in our ancestral
environment is being blocked by clothing
by buildings by
glass and that is causing us not to
synthesize the stuff so vitamin D that's
a place where actually you probably are
deficient and you should correct for it
but in General Health does not come from
pills there are drugs that are worth
taking when something has gone wrong for
which this is an appropriate remedy but
in general the the style of thinking in
which people are you know put on statins
for because some number on their chart
suggested to somebody that they were in
danger this is nonsense and it doesn't
it doesn't pan out if you look at the
the evidence we harmed people with
stattin right the number of people who
benefited from them was Tiny the number
of people who sold them was
large and then you can extend this logic
to other things
too how
much are you wired for this world and
how much could you restore St a
relationship with other people and with
the environment that just simply matches
what your ancestors would have done
right we would all benefit by spending
more time outside we all benefit from
having close relationships with friends
with lovers things that last a
lifetime and
the obsession with modernizing
everything is self-defeating
right in general there are things that
are worth Mo modernizing but it should
be a fairly High bar when we depart from
an ancestral pattern it should be for a
very good reason and it should be with
our eyes wide open about the unintended
consequences of doing
it so I don't know whether this is
striking you as operationalizable but
you want your environment to look as
ancestral as it can you want the
developmental environment of a child to
be a good match for the environment that
they're going to live in as an adult you
want your relationships to
be
uh I'm again I'm not arguing for
perfectly traditional but you want them
to be recognizably traditional right and
those things um it's kind of a high bar
because frankly you've you've got
something that your ancestors didn't
have this two last questions I have for
you if that's okay one of them is kind
of raised there which
was wait we was absolutely was not
raised there but it was in between the
lines of one of the things you said
about
relationships is
pornography and we live in a world now
because of screens and and all of these
things that we can access these sort of
artificial romantic relationships and
stimulation using the screens that
11year olds have in their
pocket my question is is pornography bad
for us
uh it's an unmitigated disaster but I
will say that with a caveat I am not
arguing against erotica humans have a
very long-standing relationship with
erotic content and I don't think there's
anything inherently wrong with erotic
content the problem is pornography
itself and I I know I'm not supposed to
be able to Define it but I will anyway
pornography is erotic content the
motivation for producing it have having
been
profit so what's happening is the people
who are making porn are transferring our
wealth to them and I don't just mean
money they are destroying
the um
sacred
sexual
um
toolkit that is the birthright of every
human being they are destroying it for
money they are distorting it and that
Distortion I would say comes in
two two
identifiable
Realms one is
that well actually maybe it's more than
two but men have two general
reproductive strategies that work
evolutionarily women have one the two
that men have are a soand go love them
and leave them don't invest in women or
their offspring
mode and the other is invest in
Offspring and contribute to protecting
them and raising them when men are in
that second mode they are not exactly
like women but they are symmetrical to
women in terms of how choosy they are
about mates about how um careful they
are in their interactions
when men are in the first mode when
they're thinking in terms of not
investing in a sexual partner that is
effectively
predatory and the reason that it's
predatory is that human babies are so
expensive to raise that no woman with a
choice would elect to raise one alone if
she could instead have a partner join
her in that so women are built to avoid
sex that does not come with
commitment they've
been convinced by modernity that that's
not sophisticated that that's male
oppression whatever it might be but the
truth
is we have moved in the direction of
women behaving like men at their worst
rather than men behaving like women at
their best and it's a mistake so you
don't want relationship especially
really ones about the most powerful
stuff there is a human sexual
interaction is about as close as you get
and you don't want that relationship to
be about some predatory mode that you
have for I don't know ANC ancestral
circumstances that frankly were often
uh ghastly and Unforgivable
yeah rape and things like that exactly
so what we should really want is a
society that actually causes men to find
this other side of themselves which is
an investing caring decent side and
that's not an unmasculine side right a
man you know investing in a woman and
defending his family and providing for
them that's all perfectly masculine
stuff right it's a lot more mature than
than the other alternative but in any
case the pornography
is pushing Us in the direction of this
predatory mindset being synonymous with
sexuality it also inherently leads to a
view of sex that is Extreme and the
reason for that has to do with Market
competition that pornographers are all
selling the same thing right they're
selling human
sex how do you capture attention in a
market where every competitor has the
same stuff well
you figure out what taboo hasn't been
broken yet and you break it that will
distinguish you from your competitor so
you've got an arms race in which
pornographers are trying to find more
and more extreme stuff to get the
attention and therefore the money of
consumers it's not a good idea you don't
want an arms race this is not sex isn't
some new thing you know it's not a
technology that we're trying to figure
out where it goes this is an ancient
thing and we're wrecking it in a
economic arms r race that is really bad
for the people who consume this stuff
and it's really bad for society it's
causing people not to want to partner
because when they do start a sexual
relationship they may find that their
partner is uh violent because I mean
here here's the the hidden aspect of
this human beings figure out what sex is
in large measure through observation of
other humans
that's natural and in fact in hunter
gatherer societies we know that as weird
as this sounds kids learn what sex is
because they're housed with their
parents and they may you know be half
asleep and so they observe something
real so the human is built to learn this
through some kind of observation and
inference but if your if your detectors
are saturated with phony sexual
interaction designed to get you to you
know pay attention rather than real
sexual interactions that actually happen
between people then it corrupts your
whole understanding of what you're
supposed to be
doing and then we've got AI humanoid
robots the same time so you're GNA have
there's going to be in our lifetime
there's going to be a news story that
breaks and it's going to be describing
this very large community of millions
and millions of men and maybe women as
well who are in a committed relationship
with a humanoid robot who is pleasuring
them in all the right ways and it's
having sex with them and giving them no
problems and affirming everything they
want to hear and helping them around the
house oh the worst thing you said is
affirming everything they want to hear
yeah but but you just think about what's
stopping them doing that and the only
thing stopping you doing that honestly
if I'm being completely honest is the
stigma and stigma as we we look back
through history evaporates in a moment
when enough people start doing it Y and
we saw this with porn right oh of course
yeah that used to have a stigma oh my
God it had such a stigma and now people
just talk about it like it's nothing
yeah um and you know you're absolutely
right but I mean look
maybe I have a a wonderful relationship
really I know I married the right person
um and which is odd because I met her
when I was 16 wow um yeah that's
incredible it is incredible but it does
tell me something because as much as I
know that I'm with the right person and
I can look back on my history and just
uh understand what an important role it
played in everything good about my
life it's not simple yeah you don't want
it to be simple you don't want a
beautiful robot to tell you what you
want to hear that will wreck your life
right I mean it's like if I let's take
the Perfect
Analogy if I said to you
hey how would you like just to feel
really awesome all the
time it's 10 tempting oh it's so
tempting but it's kind of what cocaine
does right it just triggers the pleasure
Center without it having to be
accompanied by success or anything
wrecks your life right if you really get
into that stuff you'll betray every
value you've got just to keep the high
going so this is the same thing you
don't want a sexy beautiful robot to
make you feel great about yourself
because you will become nothing struggle
matters yeah it does which is why why
suffering is not something we should be
trying to cure and that brings me to the
last question I was going to ask you um
of the two which was just about what
parents are getting wrong because I'm
going to be a parent at some point I'm
31 me and my partner have started trying
for um for kids and my brother is a year
older he has three kids under the age of
six and I'm trying to navigate now what
advice or what you know very top level
things I should be thinking about as a
parent I'm so glad you asked me that um
why cuz I've got some
actually useful advice um and you know
look I made mistakes with my kids and I
know what they were in large measure
maybe I don't know all of them yet but
but I also think Heather and I did
really well and and our kids bear that
story
out kids
are built to be raised
correctly they are
not fragile in the sense that you're
going to make plenty of Errors you're
going to yell at them when you shouldn't
you're going to do all sorts of stuff
you shouldn't do that does not wreck
kids the signal to noise ratio is what
you got to focus on right in general you
want your successes the things that you
do right to sufficiently outpace the
things that you screw up that they get
the idea right they're not their purpose
is not to game you it's not to evade
your Authority they're trying to figure
out how to be in the world and your job
as a parent is to mirror the world that
they will live in right to do so in a
way that they can get the message so
that they can become you don't want a
panicky kid who is going to face danger
and freak out that's not useful that'll
get you killed what you want is
somebody who when they are faced with
something challenging brings the right
tools to bear so you'll model it for
them and you'll produce a world in which
those kinds of challenges
exists right at first in a very crude
form and then they will get more and
more sophisticated over time it's all
designed to work what you want to do is
not break it not fall in love with fads
or beliefs like you know childhood is a
time of Innocence right child you're
supposed to be playing well you know
what play is practice right yes you
should be playing you should be having a
blast but you should be playing with
things that actually have some relevance
to what you want to be as an adult right
the fun you have should be correlated
with the skills that you will want to
have picked up
and um anyway I think the key is reduce
the novelty in their lives as much as
you can novelty but by what you
mean um stuff for which they have no
evolutionary preparedness screens
screens being very high on the list um I
will tell you Heather and
I knew very little about raising kids
when we had our first and we literally
had a
conversation said do you do you know how
to do this no did you have were you
around people who did when you were a
kid not really you know that was true
for both of us and so we just kind of
decided to wing it um and one of the
things we did was we started talking to
our then infant as if he was a college
student you know it was kind of funny to
do and it didn't seem harmful and the
funny thing is it worked really well
um you your job is to shoot over their
heads and then they rise to meet it
right and so don't assume that you
should be meeting your child at their
level that's not what you're supposed to
do you're supposed to shoot above their
heads and then they come to meet it
you're supposed to ignore all the the
garbage that they used to tell parents
about oh you'll ruin your kid if you
love them too much that kind of thing
it's all nonsense right you're
programmed to
know you're supposed to love the the
tiny kid unconditionally they're
supposed to feel very very secure in
that right that's what allows them to
confront the terrifying world is that
they're completely secure at home and
then at the point where it's not so
simple you know right you're built for
this so are they and that system works
and the thing that makes it break
is novel influences especially where you
have an
antagonist right you're not supposed to
antagonist your ancestors there was some
set of things that a child should
eat there was nobody trying to trick
your child into eating something they
shouldn't because it's profitable that's
new right so anyway you're built for it
you're also extremely uh thoughtful
which is a great tool because you're
going to be living in a world with novel
stuff your book is is is so incredibly
important because it's you know until I
went through this book I didn't
understand that pretty much everything
as you say is Downstream from my
evolutionary biology and I thought of
evolutionary biology as like why is my
finger the shape that it is or what's
inside or what you know what's the
structure of the human body but actually
understanding that everything from from
the foods we eat and why that's
misaligned to the back pain that I get
to uh to the the way that I make why I
have a girlfriend and and not five
girlfriends and all of society and the
way it's constructed and all of my
biases link back to my evolutionary
biology it allows me to see a kind of
different lens on the world and I used
to think that psychology was the answer
to the world but after reading this
essential book I now know that the
answer to the world is actually much of
it exists in our evolutionary biology
our ability to see the future and to
understand the past exists in our
evolutionary biology and so I highly
recommend everybody gets this book and
has a read of it it's called a hunter
gatherer Guide to the 21st century
Evolution and the challenges of Modern
Life um by both Brett and his wife
Heather I'll link it below for everybody
to read it's a New York Times
bestselling book as well Brett we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest not knowing who they're going
to be leaving it for and the question
left for you is okay do I get to know
who left it you never get to know unless
the they all these questions become
conversation cards so we have a pack for
you so if you turn it over and scan it
with your iPhone you can watch who
answered the question on the other side
oh so your question will become a card
and then you can turn it over and scan
it and on the other side will be the
person that answered it um if you could
travel back to meet one member of your
family when they were the age you are
now what would you ask
them
W I guess I would ask ask my grandfather
who I was very close
with who had a great
many he had Great Hopes for Humanity and
he had tremendous fears about exactly
what we're doing wrong not in detail but
he understood that our power
to break the world
exceeded
our wisdom about how to manage those
Powers I guess I would ask
him if
he could have been
certain that he was actually right and
that the magnitude of the danger in
2024 would exceed even his
substantial
concerns what might he do differently to
raise the
alarm is that what you're trying to do
yeah I I I
live by the following
premise if you were on a canoe being
pulled towards a waterfall
and the chances of your paddling out of
the
danger was growing vanishingly small
there's no point at which it makes sense
to stop
paddling you don't know what you don't
know and the chances that you might just
barely escape a terrible disaster
because you didn't give in to
hopelessness means that what you do as
things get very dire is you double down
and you you push as hard as you can and
so what I honestly believe is
that it is very very
late but as far as I know it is not too
late if we began the process now of
waking up to what's actually causing our
problem which is hyper novalty hyper
novalty for in simple terms meaning
meaning the rate of change is simply too
great for our ability to adapt to
catchup if we woke up to that problem
and we got serious about addressing it I
believe that we could still do it are
you
hopeful let's put it this
way one of the tools that we use in
evolutionary biology to think about the
process of a creature becoming some
other kind of
creature is called the Adaptive
landscape and it involves thinking about
opportunities as Peaks the value of an
opportunity is the height of the peak
and the obstacles to going from one Peak
to a Higher One are
valleys there's no guarantee that just
because you've gone into a valley that
you're going to go up a peak on the
other side right that
involves some luck and some careful
navigation because if that other Peak is
far away in the clouds and you're off by
four degrees you could just simply miss
it so the Peril is real we are entering
an Adaptive Valley we can feel it
everybody feels it there is no guarantee
that we get out of
it but the fact that things look very
dark does not mean that we are not
moving through an Adaptive Valley to a
better Peak on the other side
so there is every reason not to give up
and to try to play our roles in this
chapter as effectively as we can to
maximize the chances that we do get to
the foothill of that other Peak and can
deliver our descendants of world as good
as the one we inherited or
better and uh let's put it this
way we all go to the
movie and we watch
The Fellowship of the Ring or whatever
the collection
of weird Heroes that we see on the
screen we we root for them and we admire
them we know what we are supposed to do
at this moment we are supposed to enter
the next chapter of the book and we are
supposed
to do as well as we can and bring our
best characteristics to bear in the hope
that it works out and if it doesn't
we will have tried and if it does we
will get to look back on this dark phase
and say isn't it great that we kept
going are you
hopeful
um you know the funny thing is I know
the answer to that question and I also
know the other answer to that question
yeah I'm
hopeful and we'll see other answer to
that question um
I mean you really want to know yes okay
because it breaks the spell the problem
is
um in order to get everybody to do what
they need to do in order that we do get
out of this we have to believe that it's
more likely to get out of it than it
probably is so I'm comfortable with that
if other people are comfortable with
that then the answer is yeah it's a
pretty dire moment
um we're going to need some luck but
what's the way to approach it often the
way to approach things is in some
conflict with how we understand them I
don't believe in fate I don't think it's
a real thing but I know that it's very
often extremely useful to behave as if
you do believe in fate so I
do Brett thank you thank you for your
generosity with your time and thank you
for your wisdom your honesty and for all
the work that you do across your YouTube
channel which I'm a big fan of your
books um and everything else that you do
if someone wants to find you where's the
best place to go is it your website or
Is it um they should find the Darkhorse
podcast Darkhorse is one word um they
can find me on Twitter at Brett Warstein
um we also have a Twitter account for
the podcast they can pick up the book
yeah um I think those are the best
places I'll link all of those below so
everyone has easy access to them on all
platforms so thank you so much BR it's
been a real honor and I feel enlightened
I feel like my eyes have been opened in
a number of ways and I feel
focused well that's great to hear it was
a a very rewarding
[Music]
conversation perfect Ted has quite
frankly taken the nation by storm a
small green energy drink that you've
probably seen popping up to a Tesco or
to a waitrose they've grown by almost
10,000% in a very short period of time
because people are sick and tired of the
typical unhealthy energy drinks and
they've been looking for an alternative
perfect Ted is the drink that I drink as
I'm sat here doing the podcast because
it gives me increased focus it doesn't
give me crashes which sometimes might
happen if I'm having a 3 four five six
hour conversation with someone on the
podcast and it tastes amazing it's
exactly what I've been looking for in
terms of energy that's why I'm an
investor and that's why they sponsor
this podcast and for a limited time
perfect Ted have given dire of a CEO
listeners only a huge 40% off if you use
the code diary 40 at checkout don't tell
anybody about this and you can only get
this online for a limited time so make
sure you don't miss out
[Music]
ah